BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AB 20 - Careers in Agriculture, Environmental Science and Natural Resources
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course is a study of the agriculture, environmental science and natural resources industries with a
focus on career opportunities, self evaluation, and skills necessary for successful job procurement.
Topics include job trends, resumes and cover letters, interviewing skills, and the types of careers
available in agriculture, environmental science, and natural resources.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify career opportunities in agriculture, environmental science, and natural resources.
B. Define their career goals and create an educational plan to achieve these goals.
C. Prepare an effective resume and cover letter and demonstrate effective job interviewing skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Introduction
2.
Employment Trends
3.
Establishing Goals
4.
Sources of Employment Information
5.
Placement and Interest Testing
6.
Personal Inventory
7.
Personal Education Plan
8.
Resumes, Cover Letters
9.
Job Interviews
10. Career Options
11. Self Evaluation
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes

B. Portfolios
C. Papers
D. Homework
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the examples of effective cover letters provided by the instructor. Identify the three
primary components of an effective cover letter. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read the examples of effective resumes provided by the instructor. Identify the five
primary sections and their sequence in an effective resume. Be prepared to discuss in
class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a professional resume. Highlight your employment objective(s), academic
qualifications, and work history.
2. Prepare a professional quality cover letter. Be sure to establish in your letter the purpose
of the letter, your key qualifications, and a request for an interview.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit the Butte College Career Development Center. Take the "career assessment" activity
to identify potential career fields that correspond to your interests. Be prepared to share
what you learned in class.
2. Use the Eureka computer database in the Butte College Career Center to identify the
education requirements, job duties, and pay range for three job categories of interest to
you.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Echaore-McDavid, S. Career Opportunities in Agriculture, Food, and Natural Resources. 1st
Edition. Checkmark Books, 2010.
B. Schultze, Q. Resume 101: A Student and Recent-Grad Guide to Crafting Resumes and Cover
Letters that Land Jobs . 1st Edition. Ten Speed Press, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Bruce Hicks
Date: 09/29/2014

