BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AB 26 - Introduction to Agriculture Business
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides students with a basic understanding of the business and economics of the
agricultural industry; an introduction to the economic aspects of agriculture and their implications to
the agricultural producer, consumer and the food system; management principles encountered in the
day to day operation of an agricultural enterprise as they relate to the decision making process. (C-ID
AG-AB 104).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain how economic principles relate to commodity marketing sub sectors in agriculture.
B. Recognize and describe agricultural business organizational structures including; sole
proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, franchises, and cooperatives. Identify and explain
the four functions of management and how they relate to the agribusiness organization.
C. Develop an awareness of the basic laws, regulations, and regulatory agencies that interact with
the agriculture community.
D. Describe various styles of leadership.
E. Identify the role of the agricultural manager.
F. Recognize, evaluate, and propose solutions to problems in personnel, ethics and communication.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The role and organization of the agribusiness
a. The place of agribusiness in California, United States, and the global
economy
b. Types of agribusiness
c. The organization of an agribusiness
d. Types of business structure
e. Managing the agribusiness
2. Management
a. Planning
b. Leading
c. Organizing
d. Controlling
3. Managerial Problem Solving in Agriculture
a. Diagnosis of the situation
b. Generating alternative
c. Evaluating alternatives
d. Selecting the best alternative
e. Implementing the alternative
f. Evaluation of results

Hours
8.50

8.50

8.50

f. Evaluation of results
4. Financial Management and Control of Agribusiness
a. General business economics
b. Overview of financial statements
5. Human Resource Management
a. The role of the agriculture manager
b. Agriculture employee motivation
c. Team and team building
d. Labor relations
6. Business Land and Ethics in Agriculture
a. Agriculture values
b. Agriculture business ethnics
c. Personal values
d. Agricultural Law and the regulatory environment
Total Hours

8.50

8.50

8.50

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
E. Case Studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Short papers
F. Essays and research papers
G. Business Plan
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and interpret an article pertaining to current events in agriculture, posted on the class
portal. Be prepared to discuss the issues and take a pro/con position.
2. Read the case study in your text dealing with "Going Broke While Making a Profit".
Identify how this happened and how it could have been avoided.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 7-10 page Business Plan for an agricultural endeavor of your choice. The Business
Plan should include a description of the business, a marketing plan, and financial
statements.
2. Write a two-three research page paper covering the management style of the Simplot
Corporation. Identify the companies approach to hiring, advancement, and outlook on the
future.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Locate two examples of advertising for an agricultural commodity. One should be
commodity based and the other product specific. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Interview an individual currently working in your proposed field of employment. Write a

two page paper discussing the nature of the work, the best and worst parts of the job, and
the employment outlook. Be prepared to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Beierlein, J. Principles of Agribusiness Management. 5th Edition. Waveland, 2013.
B. Barnard, F. Agribusiness Management. 4th Edition. Routledge, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Bruce Hicks
Date: 09/29/2014

