BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AB 54 - Supervision and Management in Agriculture
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the knowledge and skills relevant to the supervisor in agricultural
business. Topics include the regulatory requirements relevant to labor management in agriculture and
effective communication with native and non-native English speakers. The course will include case
studies on labor management, human relations, public relations, production control techniques and job
analysis.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the regulatory requirements relevant to labor management in agriculture,
including farm worker safety training and documentation, migrant labor documentation
requirements, and pesticide use in the workplace.
B. Analyze the legal requirements for agricultural employers that have been established by the
Agricultural Labor Relations Board.
C. Identify and describe the characteristics of an effective supervisor in an agricultural business.
D. Communicate effectively with native and non-native English speakers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the role of the supervisor in agricultural businesses
2. Characteristics of an effective supervisor/manager
3. Techniques for effective communication with native and non-native English
speakers in agricultural settings
4. Understanding the background, culture, and expectations of the Hispanic
labor force
5. Skills and tools of supervision in the agricultural workplace
6. Employer and employee responsibilities with regard to hazardous substances
such as pesticides
7. Workplace safety training, including documentation
8. Management techniques
9. Labor Relations, unions and laws and procedures as established by the
California Labor Relations Board
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
9.00
9.00
9.00
7.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Papers
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section of the text dealing with preparing worker evaluations. Be prepared to
define and discuss the three primary types of evaluations in class.
2. Read and interpret the case study involving worker tardiness. Be prepared to discuss how
the situation could be handled.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three page paper comparing Theory X and Theory Y management styles. Include
in your paper definitions of each, pro/con of each, and a hypothetical example of each in
the workplace.
2. Prepare a 2-3 page new employee orientation manual for a production oriented business.
Include work place policies, procedures and rules.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview an employee in an agriculture firm that employs more than 10 people. Ask how
they motivate their employees and about their retention practices. Be prepared to discuss
what you learned in class.
2. Attend the field trip to Lundberg Family Farms. Be prepared to describe their approach to
hiring and promotion.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Certo, S. Supervision: Concepts and Skill Building. 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Three-ring notebook

Created/Revised by: Bruce Hicks
Date: 09/29/2014

