BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ACCT 110 - Accounting for Payroll
3 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II and ACCT
2 or ACCT 128 or ACCT 20
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture
This course introduces students to the payroll function and the necessary record keeping needed to
comply with California and federal laws and regulations. Both manual and computer applications are
included.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Calculate gross employee earnings, tax withholding, other payroll deductions, and net pay in
accordance with relevant federal and state laws.
B. Interpret, develop, and classify appropriate data to apply payroll principles.
C. Create accurate, complete California and federal schedules, forms and supporting documents.
D. Describe and apply employment laws that impact the payroll of a company.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fair Labor Standards Act
2. Federal Insurance Contributions Act
3. Income tax withholding laws
4. Recordkeeping requirements
5. Fair employment laws
6. Computing gross pay, net pay, W-4’s, payroll register
7. Computing Social Security taxes
8. Computing income tax withholdings
9. Unemployment compensation taxes
10. Analyzing and journalizing payroll
11. Computerized payroll programs
12. Quarterly and annual payroll returns
13. State taxes
14. Multi-state payroll
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Manual and computerized practice sets
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Projects - payroll practice sets.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read "California Employer’s Guide 2012" posted online and be prepared to discuss
employer responsibilities in class.
2. Read the chapter on Unemployment Compensation Taxes and be prepared to present what
you learned in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare payroll registers, maintain employees’ earnings record, journalize and post
payroll and payroll tax entries, complete tax deposit forms, and prepare quarter-end and
year-end payroll tax forms for the assigned project.
2. Write a two page memo to the company president explaining your recommendations to
effectively manage company policies for compensated leave time.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete homework problems for the Journalizing Payroll Transactions chapter. Bring
the assignment to class and be prepared to discuss your answers.
2. Complete homework problems in Excel or a similar spreadsheet program. Print and bring
to class prepared to discuss your answers. Be sure to print the formulas.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bieg B. , Toland J.. Payroll Accounting 2012. 2012 Edition. Thompson-Southwestern, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Patrick Christensen
Date: 04/01/2013

