BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ACCT 105 - Income Tax Preparation
4 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: ACCT 20 or Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level
II
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture
This course is a study of the Federal and California income tax laws that apply to taxpayers, the
application of the laws by computation of various practical problems and the completion of forms
required by the Internal Revenue Service and the California State Franchise Tax Board. The
requirements for becoming a licensed tax preparer and the rules and regulations governing licensed tax
preparers are reviewed. This course is primarily designed for the vocational student. It will orient the
student toward working with tax problems in an accounting office, a financial institution, an enrolled
agent's office, the Internal Revenue Service, the California State Franchise Tax Board, a state licensed
tax preparers' office or in their own office.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Prepare a moderately complex Internal Revenue Service Form 1040 and California Franchise
Tax Board Form 540 and their associated and supporting forms.
B. Calculate, compare, analyze and select the appropriate tax provision that would most benefit the
taxpayer's circumstances.
C. Plan and anticipate potential income tax consequences of financial events.
D. Identify issues and potential tax liabilities or benefits.
E. Locate and interpret various sources of technical income tax research data.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of the tax structure
2. Tax calculation, payments and reporting procedures
3. Gross income inclusions
4. Gross income exclusions and adjustments to income
5. Personal and other itemized deductions
6. Self-employed tax issues
7. Depreciation and Amortization
8. Rental activities
9. Property: basis and nontaxable exchanges
10. Property: capital gains, losses, and depreciation recaptures
11. Net Operating Loss (NOL), Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT), and
business tax credits
12. Withholding, payroll, and estimated taxes

Hours
2.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
5.00
6.00
5.00
6.00
4.00
5.00

13. California nonresidents
14. California tax practitioner requirements
15. Estates and trusts
16. Taxation of other business entities such as Subchapter S-Corporation,
Corporation, Partnership, and Limited Liability Company (LLC)
Total Hours

5.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. In-class assignments
G. Classroom participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on Gross Income Exclusions and Deductions for Adjusted Gross Income
(AGI). Be prepared to discuss the items that affect AGI in class.
2. Read the chapter on Personal Itemized Deductions. Prepare the homework related to
home mortgage interest.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a form 1040 based on information provided by the instructor, and be prepared to
discuss deductions in class.
2. After reading the chapter on Self-employed tax issues complete a one-two page paper
describing what items are included and what items are limited in calculating these taxes.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using the cumulative problems 1-4, prepare an individual tax return for a hypothetical
client with information provided by the instructor.
2. Using the IRS website, research the rules related to rental income and rental expenses and
their placement on a form 1040. Be prepared to discuss rental activities in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Linda M. Johnson, Ph.D., CPA. Essentials of Federal Income Taxation for Individuals and
Business. 2012 Edition. CCH, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Dena Hartman
Date: 04/01/2013

