BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ACCT 20 - Introduction to Accounting
3 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II or MATH
217 or concurrent enrollment
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture
This course is an introductory accounting course designed for students with little or no prior
accounting training. The course covers the entire accounting cycle including analysis of business
transactions, journalizing, posting, and preparation of financial statements using a hands-on approach.
Provides foundation for further study of accounting principles and recommended prior to enrollment
in Financial Accounting (ACCT 2), especially for Accounting Majors.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and define basic accounting terminology, principles and practices
B. Analyze, journalize, and post business transactions
C. Prepare financial statements including income statement, statement of owner's equity, and
balance sheet.
D. Reconcile a bank account by identifying and accounting for differences between the bank
statement's cash balance and the general ledger's cash balance.
E. Calculate a payroll check and describe associated employee and employer payroll obligations
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Accounting Concepts and Financial Statements
2. T-Accounts and Trial Balance Preparation
3. Journal Entires and Posting to the General Ledger
4. Adjusting Entries and the Worksheet
5. Closing Entries and Post-Closing Trial Balance
6. Bank Accounts and Cash Funds
7. Payroll Accounting: Employee earnings and deductions
8. Payroll Accounting: Employer taxes, payments and reports
9. Sales and Cash Receipts
10. Purchases and Cash Payments
11. Merchandise Company Adjusting and Closing Entries
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Practice Sets
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the Internal Control and Accounting for Cash chapter and be prepared to discuss
controls over cash disbursement and cash receipts.
2. Read from the Accounting for Payroll: Employee Earnings and Deductions chapter and be
prepared to calculate gross earnings, federal tax, social security, medicare, and state
disability withholdings.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the assigned practice set by recording transactions in the general journal,
posting to the general ledger, preparing a trial balance, worksheet, financial statements,
journalizing and posting adjusting entries, preparing an adjusted trial balance, journalizing
and posting closing entries, and preparing a post-closing trial balance.
2. Given the information on Hypothetical Company, write a memo explaining which internal
control principles are being violated and what needs to be done to correct the situation.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete exercises from the Internal Control and Accounting for Cash chapter.
Demonstrate competency at preparing bank reconciliations as well as journalizing the
appropriate items from the bank reconciliation.
2. Complete assinged problems from the Internal Control and Accounting for Cash chapter.
Be prepared to explain how each scenario violated the principles of internal control and
how each scenario should be corrected.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Dansby, R., Kaliski, B., Lawrence, M.. College Accounting. 5th Edition. Paradigm Publishing,
2010.

Created/Revised by: Patrick Christensen
Date: 04/01/2013

