BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ACCT 2 - Financial Accounting
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: ACCT 20 or BCIS 85 and Reading Level IV; English Level
III; Math Level III or MATH 217 or concurrent enrollment
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This is the study of accounting as an information system, examining why it is important and how it is
used by investors, creditors, and others to make decisions. The course covers the accounting
information system, including recording and reporting of business transactions with a focus on the
accounting cycle, the application of generally accepted accounting principles, the financial statements,
and statement analysis. Includes issues relating to asset, liability, and equity valuation, revenue and
expense recognition, cash flow, internal controls, and ethics. (C-ID ACCT 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the nature and purpose of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Explain and apply the components of the
conceptual framework for financial accounting and reporting, including the qualitative
characteristics of accounting information, the assumptions underlying accounting, the basic
principles of financial accounting, and the constraints and limitations on accounting
information.
B. Define and use accounting and business terminology.
C. Explain what a system is and how an accounting system is designed to satisfy the needs of
specific businesses and users; summarize the purpose of journals and ledgers.
D. Apply transaction analysis, input transactions into the accounting system, process this input, and
prepare and interpret the four basic financial statements.
E. Distinguish between cash basis and accrual basis accounting and their impact on the financial
statements, including the revenue recognition and matching principles.
F. Identify and illustrate how the principles of internal control are used to manage and control the
firm's resources and minimize risk.
G. Explain the content, form, and purpose of the basic financial statements (including footnotes)
and the annual report, and how they satisfy the information needs of investors, creditors, and
other users.
H. Explain the nature of current assets and related issues, including the measurement and reporting
of cash and cash equivalents, receivables and bad debts, and inventory and cost of goods sold.
I. Explain the valuation and reporting of current liabilities, estimated liabilities and other
contingencies.
J. Identify and illustrate issues relating to long-term asset acquisition, use, cost allocation, and
disposal.
K. Distinguish between capital and revenue expenditures.
L. Identify and illustrate issues relating to long-term liabilities, including issuance, valuation, and
retirement of debt (including the time value of money).
M. Identify and illustrate issues relating to stockholders' equity, including issuance, repurchase of
capital stock, and dividends.
N. Explain the importance of operating, investing and financing activities reported in the Statement
of Cash Flows.
O. Interpret company activity, profitability, liquidity and solvency through selection and

O. Interpret company activity, profitability, liquidity and solvency through selection and
application of appropriate financial analysis tools.
P. Identify the ethical implications inherent in financial reporting and be able to apply strategies for
addressing them.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Purposes and uses of accounting information
2. The accounting cycle and accounting information system
3. Cash and accrual accounting concepts
4. Internal control and cash
5. Financial reporting rules and disclosure, including international standards
such as International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
6. Reporting and analyzing current assets
7. Reporting and analyzing current liabilities
8. Reporting and analyzing long-term assets
9. Reporting and analyzing long-term liabilities
10. Reporting and analyzing stockholder’s equity
11. Measuring cash flow
12. Financial statements and statement analysis
13. Ethical issues
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
8.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Practice and drill on new procedures using manual and computerized methods.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the Accounting For Receivables chapter and be prepared to explain the different
methods used to account for bad debts as well as the different conventions used to

methods used to account for bad debts as well as the different conventions used to
calculate interest.
2. Read the instructions and transactions in the accounting simulation, then complete the
assigned practice set. Record February's transactions in the general journal, post to the
general ledger, prepare a trial balance, journalize and post adjusting entries, and prepare an
adjusted trial balance, accounts payable and accounts receivable schedules, and financial
statements. Be prepared to share with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an 8-10 page formal business report explaining the financial ratios, horizontal
analysis, specific challenges and opportunities, and non-financial factors affecting each of
the two assigned companies. Based on this analysis explain which company is a better
investment.
2. Read the Lenovo Group's most recent annual report and answer the following questions:
1) who audited the company's financial statements 2) what contingent liabilities does the
company note 3) what method does the company use to calculate the value of inventory 4)
what risk factors does the company reference 5) what products and services does the
company provide 6) what regions does the company operate in and what percentage of
revenue is derived from each region.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete homework problems 7.1 to 7.4 in Excel or a similar spreadsheet program, print,
and bring to class. Be prepared to discuss your answers and how the various interest
conventions and methods of calculating the allowance for doubtful accounts effected your
answers. Make sure to print the Excel formulas for problem 7.4.
2. Complete exercises 1-13 to demonstrate competency accounting for bad debts, notes
receivable, factoring receivables, and credit card payments. Submit the exercises via
Blackboard.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Wild, J. Financial Accounting Fundamentals. 4th Edition. McGraw Hill, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Patrick Christensen
Date: 03/04/2013

