BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ACCT 30 - Accounting Capstone
Prerequisite(s): ACCT 4 (or concurrent enrollment) and ACCT 110 (or concurrent
enrollment)
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

The Capstone course is the culmination of the accounting knowledge learned in previous courses
(ACCT 20, ACCT 2, ACCT 4, ACCT 100, and ACCT 110) preparing students to enter the accounting
workforce. The course involves substantial accounting simulations where students apply the
accounting cycle, prepare supporting work-papers, create budgets and variance analysis, and
synthesize their accounting skills. This course will assist students in preparing for the American
Institute of Professional Bookkeepers' certification exam.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze, organize, and present financial data in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.
B. Prepare accurate and ethical financial statements.
C. Demonstrate appropriate written calculations and documentation to support journal entries,
general ledger, financial statements and business decisions.
D. Find and revise accounting errors and make appropriate adjustments when accounting changes
occur.
E. Work independently and develop appropriate problem solving skills.
F. Demonstrate good work habits necessary to succeed in the field of accounting and become
employable.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review accounting process & financial statements.
2. Accounting Simulation - manual
3. Adjusting entries
4. Correcting Errors
5. Methods of Depreciation
6. Inventory: Journal Entries and cost flow methods
7. Accounting simulations - computerized
8. Payroll: Employment Records, Withholding, Reporting
9. Accounting simulations - Budgeting
10. Professionalism
11. Interviewing & job search skills
12. Accounting simulations - Financial Statement Analysis & Ratios
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
6.00
4.00
6.00
7.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
7.00
2.00
2.00
6.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Case research via Internet and library resources
J. Computerized accounting simulation where students practice journal entries and other work
related to the field (at option of instructor)
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Lab Projects
G. Final Examination
H. In-class assignments
I. Accounting simulations.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the “Units of Production” chapter in the Mastering Depreciation book. Provide a
review of the material and practice the concepts presented.
2. Read the “Prepaid (Deferred) Expenses” chapter in the Mastering Adjusting Entries book.
Provide a review of the material and practice the concepts presented.
3. Read an article on the internet about financial statements and be prepared to discuss the
significance of the article chosen.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a memo explaining what you found most useful from the guest speaker’s
presentation on professionalism and interviewing skills.
2. Complete complex journal entries and associated explanations for the California
Adventures Company accounting simulation.
3. Prepare a report on the financial statements and financial ratios for both a domestic and
international company. Note any differences in accounting practice and explain which
company is a more attractive investment.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Use QuickBooks to complete the Sherlock Detective Company accounting simulation.
This includes entering transactions, creating journal entries, posting to the general ledger,
and creating financial statements for each month of data.
2. Complete homework problems for sections 7-9 of the Mastering Payroll book.
3. Complete homework problems for sections 1-4 of the Mastering Correction of
Accounting Errors book.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Salam, Debera. Mastering Payroll. AIPB, 2009.
B. Association of Certificed Fraud Examiners. Mastering Internal Controls & Fraud Prevention.
AIPB, 2007.
C. Kalfayan, Garo. Mastering Depreciation. AIPB, 2008.
D. Bulmash, Gary. Mastering Adjusting Entries. AIPB, 2007.
E. Fettus, Sharon. Sharon. Mastering Correcton of Errors. AIPB, 2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Instructor supplied supplemental handouts

Created/Revised by: Dena Hartman
Date: 12/05/2011

