BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AGS 30 - Ecology of Insect and Disease Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of the scientific principles and concepts of ecologically based pest management,
with emphasis on economically important insects and pathogens in agriculture, environmental
horticulture, natural resources, parks and recreation. Included is an introduction to insects and disease
organisms, their biology, identification and management, with a focus on plants of the local
geographic area.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe basic entomology and plant pathology and identify insects and plant pathogens.
B. Explain what constitutes a "pest" and reproductive strategies pests may have that make them
successful as pests.
C. Plan and evaluate management strategies for insect and disease pests.
D. Explain the core concepts of integrated pest management (IPM) systems and the approaches to
developing these systems.
E. Analyze how politics influence pest control and how it influences pest management
decision-making.
F. Identify and discuss some of the common pest problems of agricultural and horticultural crops
and the management of these problems, with an emphasis on IPM with commercial agricultural
practices.
G. Identify the basic California Pest management laws and regulations.
H. Identify commercially-important orders of insects which are pests and pollinators.
I. Identify commercially-important crop diseases and pathogens.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to pest management and the scientific method
2. Introduction to insect evolution and ecology
3. Insect anatomy and physiology
4. Insect classification
5. Insect diversity and systematics
6. Insect growth and development
7. Insect population dynamics
8. Non-chemical pest management methods
9. Pesticides
10. Biotechnological pest management methods

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00

11. IPM and Enterprise Business Process Management (EBPM) systems
12. Introduction to plant diseases
13. Fungi - biology, ecology, and management
14. Bacteria - biology, ecology, and management
15. Viruses - biology, ecology, and management
16. Review of the management of plant diseases
Total Hours

2.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Introduction to scientific, collecting methods
2. Insect anatomy
3. Introduction to and study of insect orders
4. Preparation of written laboratory reports
5. Population dynamics and IPM laboratory
6. Sampling techniques of plant pathogens
7. Collecting specimens field trips
8. Study, discussion, and preparing a written summary of an IPM systems
9. Insect identification and preparation of collection
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
6.00
6.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
15.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Class participation
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Laboratory evaluation will consist of problem solving exercises, an exam, written reports, and
the completion of an insect collection.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in your text on disease transmission and complete the corresponding
homework assignment listed online. Be prepared for an in class discussion in small groups
by pathogen or crop.
2. Read the chapter in your text on insect mouthparts and complete the corresponding
homework assignment provided online. Be prepared for an in class discussion in small
groups.
B. Writing Assignments

1. Write 2-3 paragraphs detailing the abundance, characteristics and functions of the
different classes of almond diseases during an in class assessment.
2. Select a label of an agricultural pesticide, write a 300-word description of the PPE, REI,
and PHI for a specified crop and pest from the label.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Take home a diagram of an insect's mouthparts, label each structure, and then provide a
brief
description of the labeled structures. At the next class meeting, share your diagram in
small groups.
2. Complete an insect collection with a minimum of 30 distinct species. Both mature and
immature specimens are allowed, and cite all required collection information. Include an
identification sheet for all specimens.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Borror, D.J. and White, R.E.. Peterson Field Guide; Insects. Houghton and Mifflin Co. , 2005.
B. Flint, M.L.. IPM in Practice Principles and Methods of Integrated Pest Management. 2nd
Edition. University of California Agriculture and National Resources, publication #3418, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Materials: Insect box and pins (from the Ag Dept office)

Created/Revised by: Carrie Monlux
Date: 11/03/2014

