BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AGS 10 - World Food and Hunger Issues
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of the world's food needs with emphasis on the problems and policies of
developing nations. The course will examine the evolution from hunter-gatherer to domesticated
agriculture and the role agriculture currently plays in the sustainability of economic and political
progress of developing nations and the ethical and environmental implications.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the factors that enabled the development of early agrarian societies.
B. Describe the three "revolutions" in agricultural technology.
C. Analyze the impact of food distribution on hunger.
D. Identify and explain the major global food issues.
E. Describe the problems of food and fiber production in developing and developed countries and
identify potential solutions to these problems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Geography review, Homo Habilis to Homo sapiens
2. The rise and spread of food production
3. Causes of the spread of food production
4. Development of ancient crops
5. Demography, human population growth and agricultural productivity
6. The Malthusian dilemma
7. International food policy
8. Development, productivity, sustainability of crop production
9. Food security today
10. Potential solutions to world hunger
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
8.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion

E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Papers
C. Homework
D. Written Assignments
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Short papers
G. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section of the text regarding the rise and spread of food production. Be prepared
to discuss the factors that led some peoples to develop agrarian societies and why others
did not.
2. Read the section of the text regarding the Malthusian Dilemma. Be prepared to identify
the rationale of Malthusians and Non- Malthusians.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In formal essay form, write a 3-5 page paper discussing the origin and development of a
cereal crop. Include the geographic origin, methods of production by early agriculturalist,
and nutritional attributes.
2. Read the article posted on the class portal focusing on sustainable agriculture. Write a
one-two page paper discussing the articles key points, including the authors view on what
defines sustainable agriculture.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Locate an article on the internet that discusses neolithic agriculture in the Fertile Crescent.
Be prepared to discuss the specific crops and livestock in use during this period.
2. Watch the you-tube video of Jeffery Sachs' speech at Columbia University. Be prepared to
identify five methods that Sachs proposes to end poverty.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Tauger, M. Agriculture In World History. 1st Edition. Routledge, 2010.
B. Paarlberg, R. Food Politics. 2nd Edition. Oxford University Press, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Bruce Hicks
Date: 10/20/2014

