BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AGS 45 - Feeds and Feeding
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of the basic nutrients involved in animal nutrition: protein, energy, vitamins,
minerals and feed additives and their utilization by the animal's body. An analysis of the feeding value
of common feedstuffs in practical livestock rations will be completed. Students will be introduced to
the formulation of balanced rations for species of livestock including least cost computer formulated
rations.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify feedstuffs common to livestock rations.
B. Use feeding tables and publications in analyzing feedstuffs.
C. Describe basic animal nutrients and their assimilation with the body.
D. Balance a ration for a variety of commercial livestock species.
E. Identify problems involved in practical feeding of livestock.
F. Evaluate economic factors and trends in feeding.
G. Identify various primary and by-product feeds, forms and processing techniques.
H. Apply changing nutritional requirements based upon animal physiological development.
I. Identify career requirements and potential opportunities leading to successful employment.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Feeds and Feeding
2. Basic Nutrients
3. Ruminant Digestion
4. Non-Ruminant Digestion
5. Monogastric Digestion
6. Feedstuffs: Roughages, Concentrates, Supplement, Additives
7. Feedstuff Evaluation
8. Raton Balancing
9. Animal Requirements
10. Nutrient Deficiencies and Disease
11. Feeding Swine
12. Feeding Sheep
13. Feeding Beef
14. Feeding Dairy
15. Feeding Horses
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on the gastrointestinal tract and be prepared to discuss the classification
of digestive systems with the class.
2. Read the chapter on high-energy feedstuffs and be able to list key cereal grains and
by-products available for ruminants as well as monogastrics.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Utilize trade journals or internet and list common feedstuffs available in California. Write
a 2-3 page paper on the benefits of key cereal grains and alternative feeds in fattening
feedlot cattle.
2. Utilize the internet to search companies that offer fodder systems, and then write a 3-4
page paper on operation and management of alternative feeding systems.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Utilize the Internet to determine the potential by-products available, acquire pricing and
utilize some of these in formulation a dairy ration.
2. Visit a dairy and interview owners regarding feedstuffs, feeding levels and pricing of their
rations and be prepared to share results with class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Taylor, R. & Field, T. Scientific Farm Animal Management. 10th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2011.
B. Church, D. C. Livestock Feeds and Feeding. 6th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Bruce Hicks
Date: 10/20/2014

