BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 1 - Criminology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the philosophy of law enforcement, professional responsibilities and
urban problems, criminology, organization, jurisdiction and interrelationships of local, state and
federal law enforcement agencies. Students are also introduced to professional career opportunities and
qualifications required for employment within the field. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the function and process of local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies.
B. Identify career opportunities and current employment requirements in law enforcement.
C. Identify current issues and events relevant to law enforcement and relationships between the
police and society.
D. Describe the professional responsibilities of law enforcement including ethical standards and
moral responsibility.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding Criminology
2. The Changing Boundaries of Criminology
3. Counting Crime and Measuring Criminal Behavior
4. Schools of Thought Throughout History
5. Explanations of Crime and Criminal Behavior
6. Biological and Psychological Perspectives
7. Strain and Cultural Deviance Theories
8. The Formation of Subcultures
9. Labeling, Conflict and Radical Theories
10. Social Control Theory
11. Environmental Theory
12. Types of Crime
13. Violent Crimes
14. Crimes Against Property
15. White-Collar and Corporate Crimes
16. Public Order Crimes
17. International and Comparative Criminology
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Reading Assignments
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Written Assignments
C. Written or Oral Examinations
D. Research of Current Issues/Prepare Arguments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Locate and prepare a short summary of a current newspaper article on current events
relating to law enforcement. Be prepared to present your summary to the class.
2. Read the article on domestic violence homicide assigned by the instructor and be prepared
to discuss the article in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the chapter on gangs, write a minimum two-page outline of the chapter, and submit
it to the instructor at the next class meeting.
2. Research a current law enforcement topic as assigned by the instructor and write a
minimum 2500 word research paper on the topic.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the State of California written codes regarding justifiable homicide and submit a
one-two page summary of these codes.
2. Interview a law enforcement officer. In your interview focus on preparation and
professional career opportunities. Prepare a short presentation to share your findings with
the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Adler, F., Lauler, W., & Mueller, G.. Criminology. 7th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Audio visual materials
C. Current Newspapers

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

