BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 3 - Legal Research
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to legal research. Students will become familiar with and learn how to
use materials commonly found in law libraries via a web-based legal resource. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use various on-line legal resources to access legal information.
B. Identify and interpret various State statutes and legal terminology.
C. Perform legal research independently.
D. Prepare legal briefs of appellate court decisions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review of Legal Vocabulary
2. Introduction to Find Law Legal Resource
3. How to Write a Legal Brief
4. California Appellate Courts - Negligence
5. California Supreme Court - Negligence
6. Federal Courts - 1st Amendment
7. Introduction to West Law Legal Resource
8. Annotated Codes
9. Witkin Series
10. American Jurisprudence
11. California Vehicle Code
12. California Penal Code
Total Hours

Hours
1.50
2.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
3.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation

B. Final Examination
C. Homework: legal briefs of appellate court decisions and analysis of state statutes - estimated 300
words
D. Analysis of reading assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the U.S. Supreme Court decision, "Ricci, et al v. DeStefano," paying particular
attention to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits employment
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. Come to class
prepared to discuss how a firefighter promotional examination was valid when white
candidates outperform minority candidates.
2. Read six appellate court decisions and be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Based on the U.S. Supreme Court decision, "Safford Unified School Dist v. Redding,"
prepare a minimum 2 page legal brief that identifies the legal standards to search a
grammar school student suspected of possessing narcotics.
2. Access an on-line legal research source and define 20 instructor provided vocabulary used
in judicial system.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Identify and document six constitutional legal issues that relate to written statutes.
2. Define and summarize 20 instructor provided vocabulary used within the judicial system.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bast, C., Hawkins, M. Foundations of Legal Research and Writing. 5th Edition. Delmar, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts regarding constitutional issues provided by the instrutor

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

