BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 8 - Criminal Investigation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course addresses the techniques, procedures, and ethical issues in the investigation of crime,
including organization of the investigative process, crime scene searches, interviewing and
interrogating, surveillance, source of information, utility of evidence, scientific analysis of evidence
and the role of the investigator in the trial process. (C-ID AJ 140). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and explain the role of documentation in the criminal investigative process.
B. Recognize, identify and explain the implications of a given piece of evidence in a criminal
process.
C. Identify critical ethical issues relating to criminal investigation.
D. Describe successive evolutionary stages of the criminal investigative process.
E. Identify procedures for first responders to crime scenes.
F. Describe the duties related to the basic functions of crime scene management (management
control, evidence search and processing, general area investigation).
G. Identify role of forensic examination in a criminal investigative process.
H. Compare and contrast the legalities and strategies of interview and interrogation.
I. Identify key information sources and data systems available to investigators.
J. Explain the role of the investigator in the judicial process.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Crime scene management
2.
Utility of evidence
3.
Documentation of evidence
4.
Follow-up investigation
5.
Interviewing (witness identification)
6.
Interrogating techniques
7.
Physical evidence
8.
Laboratories
9.
Ethical challenges
10. Surveillance
11. Source of information
12. Trial process
Total Hours

Hours
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Objective and subjective examinations/quizzes
D. Case analysis
E. In class exercises/presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and outline the chapter on assault and turn it in at the next class meeting.
2. Read the chapter on domestic violence and identify the key points in the chapter. Come to
class prepared to discuss.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the chapter on searches, write a minimum two-page outline, and submit to the
instructor at the next class meeting.
2. Research a current law enforcement topic, as assigned by the instructor, and write a
minimum 2500-word research paper on the topic.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read and summarize an article on a local crime and come to class prepared to discuss what
you learned.
2. Research the California Penal Code regarding assault with a deadly weapon and submit a
one-page summary of your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Orthmann, C., & Hess, K.. Criminal Investigation. 10th Edition. Delmar Cengage Learning,
2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Audio-Visual Materials
C. Evidence Materials
D. Library Reference Texts

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

