BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 11 - Criminal Procedure
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides an examination and analysis of due process in criminal proceedings from
pre-arrest through trial and appeal utilizing statutory law and state and constitutional law precedents.
(C-ID AJ 122). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the stages in the trial process.
B. Identify and critically analyze the concepts of due process as found in the 6th, 8th, and 14th
amendments, including right to counsel, bail, jury trial and due process.
C. Describe the history and application of the exclusionary rule in shaping criminal procedure.
D. Describe application of the right to counsel in a criminal case.
E. Describe application of the right to a jury trial.
F. Critically analyze the constitutionality of searches, seizures, admissions and confessions.
G. Describe what constitutes an unreasonable search and seizure.
H. Describe the Miranda decision and the privilege against self-incrimination.
I. Prepare legal briefs of appellate course decisions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Stages of the criminal process
2. Sixth Amendment jurisprudence
3. Eighth Amendment jurisprudence
4. Fourteenth Amendment jurisprudence
5. Fourth Amendment jurisprudence
6. Fifth Amendment jurisprudence
Total Hours

Hours
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION

A. Homework
B. Objective and subjective examinations/quizzes
C. Case analysis
D. In class exercises/presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on arrest, search and seizure. Review the Bill of Rights, paying
particular attention to the 4th Amendment and the legal issue of "protected areas and
interest". Come to class prepared to discuss the legal limitations upon the police to search
and seize individuals or property.
2. Read six appellate court decisions and be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a one-two page legal brief of an Appellate Court decision relating to police
interrogations and confessions. Prepare an oral presentation for class.
2. Identify and write a 2 page summary of at least six constitutional issues related to criminal
procedure.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Define circumstances that constitute an unreasonable search and seizure.
2. Access online legal research source and define vocabulary used in judicial system.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Jerold A. Israel & Wayne R. LaFave. Criminal Procedure in a Nutshell. 7th Edition. West
Group, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts regarding constitutional issues provided by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

