BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 2 - Administration of Justice
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the characteristics of the criminal justice system in the United
States. Focus is placed on examining crime measurement, theoretical explanations of crime, responses
to crime, components of the system, and current challenges to the system. The course examines the
evolution of the principles and approaches utilized by the justice system and the evolving forces which
have shaped those principals and approaches. Although justice structure and process is examined in a
cross cultural context, emphasis is placed on the US justice system, particularly the structure and
function of US police, courts, and corrections. Students are introduced to the origins and development
of criminal law, legal process, and sentencing and incarceration policies. (C-ID AJ 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate an understanding of criminological theories used to explain crime and criminality.
B. Explain the methods, theories, and concepts associated with the sources of crime data, the
emerging patterns of criminal activity, and the costs of crime.
C. Understand the history, development, structure, and function of American police, courts, and
corrections.
D. Demonstrate an understanding of the history, structure, and function of the police.
E. Convey an understanding of the process of adjudication.
F. Show an understanding of corrections including the roles of probation, parole, and community
corrections; as well as the functions of prisons and jails.
G. Identify and describe special issues in the criminal justice system involving juvenile
delinquency, drugs, and the future development.
H. Critically analyze and discuss issues of crime and justice from varying perspectives.
I. Utilize conclusions from scholarly research in creating informed positions on controversial
issues in criminal justice.
J. Demonstrate the ability to raise critically relevant questions based on independent reading of
criminal justice literature.
K. Effectively follow the appropriate writing style practiced in the social sciences.
L. Explain the definitions of crime.
M. Understand the extent of the crime problem in America.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding the Criminal Justice System
a. Police
b. Courts
c. Corrections
d. Probation
e. Parole

Hours
8.50

f. Community Corrections
2. Crime and Victimization
a. Definitions of crime
b. Criminological theories
c. Patterns of criminal activity
d. The extent of crime in America
3. Law Enforcement
a. History of policing
b. Development of police
c. Structure of police agencies
d. Function of the police
4. Courts and Sentencing
a. Adjudication process
5. Punishment and Corrections
a. Incarceration policies
6. The Future of the Criminal Justice System
a. Special issues
b. Evolution of the criminal justice system
c. Future development
Total Hours

8.50

8.50

8.50
8.50
8.50

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Case analyses and studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Objective and subjective examinations/quizzes
D. Research Papers using APA, ASA, or a generally accepted Social Science writing format
E. In class exercises/presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article about prisoners re-entering society and be prepared to participate in a class
discussion.
2. Read an article on drug courts and be able to discuss their purpose in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the chapter on the courts, then write a two-page paper on a criminal case and discuss
your opinion of sentencing.
2. Research careers in a law enforcement agency, and submit a 2500 word paper, prepared in
the APA style, detailing the agency’s purpose, role in the community and structure.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a law enforcement officer and/or parolee and discuss their life and choices. Be
prepared to discuss what you've learned in class.

2. Tour a detention facility and discuss the experience. Be prepared to discuss what you've
learned in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Schmalleger, F.. Criminal Justice: A Brief Introduction. 8th Edition. Pearson, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The law library located within the library on the main campus
B. Internet Articles

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

