BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 10 - Juvenile Procedures
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an examination of the origin, development, and organization of the Juvenile Justice
System as it evolved in the American Justice System. The course explores the theories that focuses on
Juvenile Law, courts and processes, and the constitutional protections extended to juveniles
administered in the American Justice System. (C-ID AJ 220). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Critically analyze and describe the juvenile justice system and it context in the criminal justice
system.
B. Identify career opportunities and current employment requirements in regards to juvenile
offenders.
C. Critically distinguish between delinquency, status offenses, and dependency.
D. Critically Analyze the distinctions between the adult and juvenile justice systems.
E. Critically evaluate Constitutional protections extended to juveniles thru judicial decisions.
F. Critically appraise the Juvenile Court Dispositions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. History of the Juvenile Justice System
2. Measuring Juvenile Delinquency – UCR and /or victimization surveys
3. California Laws relating to Juvenile Delinquency and Dependency
4. Constitutional protections afforded to Juveniles through Judicial decisions
5. Juvenile Court Procedures vs Adult Court Procedures
6. Juvenile Court Dispositions
Total Hours

Hours
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Oral Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Classroom Participation/Discussion
B. Exams/Essays, Estimated 3000 Words
C. Research Current Related Issues/Prepare Arguments

VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a newspaper article about a juvenile being charged as an adult, and be prepared to
present the article for a class discussion.
2. Read a journal article on juvenile crime and come to class prepared to discuss what you
learned from the article.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a current law enforcement topic related to juveniles, as assigned by the
instructor, and type a minimum 2500 word research paper on the topic.
2. Select a documentary from the list provided by the instructor and detail the differences in
written form (one page) of juvenile offenders/delinquents, status offenders and dependent
minors.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Participate in a tour of the Butte County Juvenile Hall and prepare a one-page paper on
your observations.
2. Read the chapter on Juvenile Court Proceedings, write a two page outline, and submit it to
the instructor at the next class meeting.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Peoples, Edward E.. Juvenile Procedures in California. 6th Edition. Meadow Crest Publishing,
2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Current Newspaper/Internet Articles
B. Handouts
C. Audio-Visual Materials

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

