BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 7 - Report Writing for Law Enforcement Officers
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course is designed to improve and enhance written communication skills of current or future law
enforcement officers. Students will review basic English writing skills and apply them to written
reports relative to standardized law enforcement crime report, crime report narrative, crime scene
investigation, evidence submission and criminal citation. Emphasis will be placed on developing the
writing skills needed for preparing the reports to be submitted for case prosecution.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the importance of police report writing responsibilities as they relate to case
prosecution.
B. Utilize basic English grammar and comprehension skills to prepare police reports.
C. Transfer visual information, crime scene analysis and witness statements to standardized police
reports.
D. Demonstrate the ability to prepare professional police reports and supporting documentation for
submission to the District Attorney's office or the United States Attorney's office for
prosecution.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Parts of Speech
2.
Sentence Elements
3.
Pronouns
4.
Mechanics
5.
Spelling
6.
Police Reports
7.
Report Writing Techniques
8.
Citation Writing
9.
Police Report Preparation
10. Investigative Report Preparation
11. Review of Report from District Attorney
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Report Writing Exercises
B. Mid-term Report Writing Exercise (Peer-Reviewed)
C. Weekly Online Quiz
D. Final Report Writing Exercise (Peer-Reviewed)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Following an assigned on-line link, complete a self-evaluating reading competency test,
and be prepared to discuss with class.
2. From an assigned reading, be prepared to identify at least two writing-related topics about
which you desire additional information and to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 2-4 page paper explaining the basic components of incident-based reporting.
2. Write a 2-4 page paper explaining factors that should be considered in deciding whether to
use a solo or team approach in conducting investigation. Define each approach, and
discuss the investigatory techniques dewscribed in the textbook.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View an assigned video, and prepare a set of investigative notes based on facts obtained
from the video.
2. Based on your investigative notes from the review of an assigned video, prepare a
narrative report on the incident.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Frazee, B., & Davis, J.N.. Painless Police Report Writing. Third Edition. Pearson Publishing,
2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Redacted police reports from several agencies

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/29/2013

