BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 14 - Community Oriented Policing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the complex, dynamic relationship between communities and the justice system
in addressing crime and conflict. Emphasis is placed on the challenges and prospects of administering
justice within a diverse multicultural population. Topics include the consensus and conflicting values
in culture, religion, and law.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the history and evolution of multiculturalism in the U.S. and the challenges presented by
a multicultural society.
B. Identify and explain key issues that pose potential conflict between diverse communities and the
courts, police and corrections.
C. Identify and describe the strategies for the administration of justice in a multicultural society.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Evolving nature of multiculturalism
2. Multicultural populations
3. Demographics of interest communities
4. Police and policed the community
5. Courts and the community
6. Managing/Policing diverse populations in correctional settings
7. Strategies for facilitating conflict resolution in a multicultural society
Total Hours

Hours
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
8.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Objective and subjective examinations/quizzes

D. Case analysis
E. In class exercises/presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and outline the chapter on "Communicating with a Diverse Population" and turn it in
at the next class meeting.
2. Read a journal article on a community policing topic and come to class prepared to discuss
the article.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a current community policing topic as assigned by the instructor and write a
2500 word paper on your findings.
2. Research the California Written Codes regarding "Gang Civil Injunctions" and submit a
two-page paper on your findings.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read a newspaper article on a local gang problem in your community and be prepared to
present a summary of the article in class.
2. Read the chapter on the Media and the Police, write a minimum two page outline, and
submit it to the instructor at the next class meeting.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Miller, L., Hess, K., Orthmann, C.. Community Policing. 6th Edition. Delmar Publishing, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Audio Visual Materials
B. Handouts
C. Current Newspaper

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

