BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJ 13 - Organized Crime/Gangs
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the interrelations of organized crime, such as gangs and narcotics, to
the community. Topics include the impact of covert criminal activities upon the social structure,
symptoms of organized crime, political influences in the legal system, and management of crime
control units.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze the impact, structure and operations of organized crime groups.
B. Identify the symptoms of organized crime in the community and describe the role of the citizen
in organized crime control.
C. List and describe specific criminal violations in the areas of vice, such as gambling, prostitution
and drugs, with emphasis upon narcotics, obscenity and pornography.
D. Identify and discuss the techniques of organized criminal groups in fraud and theft cases, (often
referred to as white-collar crimes).
E. Identify the different intelligence and management techniques used in criminal justice agencies,
to control the crimes said to be committed by organized groups.
F. Evaluate the different intelligence and management techniques used in criminal justice agencies,
to control the crimes said to be committed by organized groups.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Organized Crime and the Drug Problem
2. Psychoactive Drugs: History and Classification
3. Heredity, Environment, and Psychoactive Drugs
4. Central Nervous System Stimulants
5. Downers: Opiates/Opioids and Sedative Hypnotics
6. Alcohol
7. Psychedelics
8. Other Drugs, Other Addictions
9. Drug Use and Prevention
10. Treatment
11. Mental Health and Drugs
12. Overview of a Gang
13. Historical Development of a Gang
14. How The Gang Has Evolved Over Time

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

15. How the Gang Has Influenced the Development and Direction of Public
Policy
16. What Groups of People Within This Gang Exercise the Most Power and
Control
17. What are the Career Opportunities in this Gang and How Are They Reached
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Class Discussion
C. Examinations/essay estimated 4,000 words
D. Research of current issues/prepare arguments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on drug treatment and gang suppression and be prepared to discuss the
topic in class.
2. Read and outline the chapter on Psychedelics and turn it in at the next class session.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a current gang within your community and write a minimum 1500 word
research paper on the topic.
2. Research the California Health & Safety Codes regarding what constitutes an illegal sale
of narcotics and submit a one-page written outline on your findings.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Locate a current newspaper article on current events relating to drug and gang problems
and come to class prepared to discuss what you learned.
2. Prepare a minimum two-page outline summarizing the nexus between organized crime
groups and cocaine.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Inaba, D. & Cohen, W. Uppers, Downers, All Arounders. 7th Edition. CNS Productions, 2011.

Created/Revised by: John Holland
Date: 04/01/2013

