BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJLE 100 - Law Enforcement Academy Physical Training
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): AJLE 140
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
11 hours Lecture
73 hours Lab

2 Unit(s)

This course conforms to the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST)
Basic Law Enforcement Academy requirements for Learning Domain #32, Lifetime Fitness. The
course provides an overview of physical fitness for a healthy lifestyle for peace officers. Topics
include proper nutrition, common health problems, causes of stress, stress management and physical
conditioning.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Meet or exceed the requirements as set forth by Peace Officer Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.)
for California Peace Officer Training for LD-32 Lifetime Fitness.
B. Evaluate and manage their physical fitness and maintain a healthy lifestyle in order to safely and
effectively perform peace officer duties.
C. Describe the connection between proper nutrition and maintaining body composition, physical
conditioning, and reducing the risk of illness or injury.
D. Identify and describe common health problems and utilize appropriate risk management
techniques to ensure health and physical fitness.
E. List the causes of stress and explain how to manage it effectively in order to protect personal
health and ensure the ability to perform peace officer duties.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Components of personal physical fitness programs, sessions conditiong
programs and training
2. Evaluating personal fitness
3. Improving peace officer performance within seven components of a
personal fitness program
4. Nutrition planning, supplementation and fitness goals
5. Training and treatment of fitness injuries
6. Injuries and illnesses commonly associated with law enforcement officers
7. Stress - signs, symptoms, coping, management
8. Physical training assessment
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
0.50
3.00
1.00
0.50
11.00

Lab
Topics

Hours

Topics
1. Components of personal physical fitness programs, sessions conditioning
programs and training
2. Evaluating personal fitness
3. Improving peace officer performance within seven components of a
personal fitness program
4. Physical training assessment
Total Hours

Hours
64.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
73.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Workbook assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Class Discussion
C. Participation in physical activities
D. Physical fitness assessment
E. Participation in Work Sample Test Battery (WSTB) agility/obstacle course
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read provided material regarding “Caloric Intake and Expenditure,” and be prepared to
discuss in class.
2. Read an article about the benefits of physical fitness training for peace officers, and be
prepared to discuss in small groups in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a journal for one week tracking everything that you eat. Be prepared to share your
Journal during a class discussion on nutrition.
2. List the components of the peace officer physical agility course, and briefly describe the
relevance of each component to the law enforcement profession.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research “Aerobic Target Heart Rate,” and be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Choose a health related topic, research the topic, and be prepared to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Audio Visual Materials
B. Handouts
C. POST Learning Domain #32, Lifetime Fitness, Student Materials

Created/Revised by: Michael Maloney
Date: 03/31/2014

