BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AJLE 151B - PC 832 Firearms Module
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
8 hours Lecture
16 hours Lab

0.75 Unit(s)

This course is the second of two modules that comprise the minimum training standards for California
peace officers as specified by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training
(P.O.S.T.). Graduates of this course qualify for minimal peace officer powers as defined by the
California Penal Code. This module contains 8 hours of classroom instruction in firearms safety,
psychological and physiological responses, current firearms law, firearms cleaning techniques, and
moral and ethical considerations. Additionally, students will participate in 16 hours of hands-on
training in drawing and holstering, loading and unloading, and basic handgun shooting principles.
Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify basic types of handguns
B. Demonstrate firearm safety
C. Demonstrate handgun shooting principles
D. Demonstrate target and combat shooting techniques
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Firearms
2. Safety Guidelines
3. Current Laws and Principles
4. Basic Types of Firearms
5. Cleaning of Firearms
6. Drawing and Holstering
7. Combat Situations
8. Psychological and Physiological Responses
9. Basic Handgun Shooting Principles
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.50
0.50
1.00
1.00
1.00
8.00

Lab
Topics
1.
Shooting Techniques and Principles
Total Hours

Hours
16.00
16.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Handouts
D. Visual Aids
E. Psychomotor Skills - Hands-on Training
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Examinations
B. Psychomotor Skills Examination
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the Workbook Series for the P.C. 832 Firearms course.
2. Read the P.O.S.T. Training and Testing Specifications for the Firearms Learning Domain.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a one-page writing assignment that details knowledge of the workings,
capabilities, and limitations of firearms. Contents shall include a listing of the primary
components of a semiautomatic pistol and magazine, steps for loading and unloading, a
description of the cycle of operation of a semiautomatic pistol, and a listing of the basic
elements to accurately shoot a firearm.
2. Complete a one-page writing assignment that details specific firearms safety
considerations. Contents shall include the four fundamental rules for firearms safety, safe
handling of ammunition, safety concerns during the loading and unloading process, steps
for rendering a semiautomatic pistol safe, practices for safely inspecting, cleaning, and
storing a firearm, and specific firearms range safety rules.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Study current firearms law and firearms safety considerations.
2. Complete prescribed learning activities contained in the Workbook Series for the Firearms
Learning Domain.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Audio Visual Materials
C. Targets
D. Handguns
E. Holsters
F. Basic Range Safety Equipment

Created/Revised by: Donald Beasley
Date: 11/21/2011

