BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ALH 104 - Medical Terminology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course explores the specialized language used within the medical profession. Emphasis is placed
on the definition, pronunciation and spelling of medical terms with focus on building medical words
using prefixes, word roots, suffixes and combining forms. To further advance a working knowledge of
these terms, vocabulary is taught in relation to the basic anatomy, physiology and pathology of body
systems.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Interpret the meaning of medical terms by analyzing the basic elements of the terms.
B. Classify medical terms in relation to basic anatomy, physiology, and pathology of body systems.
C. Identify medical terms correctly.
D. Pronounce medical terms correctly.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction of Medical Terminology
2. Body Structure
3. Integumentary (Skin and associated structures) System
4. Muscular System
5. Skeletal System
6. Cardiovascular System
7. Blood, Lymphatic and Immune Systems
8. Respiratory System
9. Digestive System
10. Urinary System
11. Reproductive System
12. Endocrine System
13. Nervous System
14. Special Senses
15. Pharmacology, Diagnostic Imaging, Surgery, Oncology
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Short papers
E. Multi-Media Presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about diagnostic imaging and be prepared to discuss terms regarding X-Ray
procedures.
2. Read the chapter about the respiratory system and be prepared to discuss root words and
combining forms regarding the respiratory system.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a one page paper about the anatomy of the respiratory system to include at least ten
medical terms from the respiratory system chapter.
2. Write a one page paper about heart disease, incorporating at least 15 medical terms
introduced in the cardiovascular chapter.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read the medical record analysis at the end of the musculoskeletal chapter and be
prepared to interpret the underlined terms.
2. Find a media advertisement about a pharmaceutical product research its usage and be
prepared to interpret medical terms within the ad.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fremgen, Bonnie. Medical Terminology, A Living Language. 6th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Visual aids, some provided by Butte College Allied Health Department.

Created/Revised by: Michael Smith
Date: 04/04/2016

