BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 16 - Archaeology and Ancient Societies
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the study of concepts, theories, data and models of anthropological
archaeology that contribute to our knowledge of the human past. The course includes a discussion of
the nature of scientific inquiry; the history and interdisciplinary nature of archaeological research;
dating techniques; methods of survey, excavation, analysis, and interpretation; cultural resource
management; professional ethics; and selected cultural sequences. (C-ID ANTH 150).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the various archaeological theories, methods, and techniques used to investigate the
human past.
B. Demonstrate an understanding of the nature of scientific inquiry and its application in
archaeological research.
C. Articulate the goals, and the legal, operational, and ethical framework of cultural resource
management and heritage preservation.
D. Illustrate the use of archaeological methods with reference to cultural sequences.
E. Discuss the relationship between anthropology and archaeology.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Types of archaeological data
2. Archaeological theory and models and their relationship to data
3. History and nature of archaeological research
4. Dating techniques
5. Methods of survey
6. Excavation methods
7. Archaeological analysis and interpretation
8. Cultural resource/heritage management
9. Cultural sequences
10. Archaeological ethics and community relations
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture

hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Directed projects and writing assignments (students will be required to write
the equivalent of 2,500 words or more through a variety of writing
assignments, to be conducted through formal research [using library
resources, computer searches, and written in a formal style, e.g. MLA, APA,
or Chicago]).
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article from the Annual Editions of Archeology titled ‘Lost Man.” This article
deals with the Kennewick man case. Pay close attention to the discussion of the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA). What issues does this
article raise with regard to the ethical and moral obligations for archaeologists regarding
the handling of ancient human burials. Be prepared to discuss this article in class.
2. Read the chapter dealing with “Preclassic Mesoamerica.” Be able to discuss the
fundamental characteristics of the preclassic period and compare with similar time periods
in other parts of the world. Also, why it is problematic to think in terms of strict or
absolute time periods when attempting to reconstruct past life-ways and culture change
over time?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 500 word essay summarizing scientific process as utilized by archaeologists. Pay
close attention to “provenience” as a key concept guiding control over archaeological
materials. Contrast the use of provenience with the related concept of “provenance,” as art
historians tend to use the term. This will provide a contrast between scientific method and
those practices utilized by art historians. Describe how archaeologists approach setting up
an archaeological site with scientific controls in place (e.g. mapping, use of datum points,
generally controlling for temporal and spatial variables). Briefly outline what happens to
archaeological materials after they are removed from a site. Keep in mind maintenance of
scientific control for organizing archaeological collections. Share your papers by way of
class presentations.
2. Write a three page essay summarizing Robert Carneiro’s “circumscription” model for state
emergence. What is “circumscription” and how does it explain state emergence?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend the Anthropology Forum at CSU Chico this coming Thursday. The topic concerns
maintenance of professional archaeological collections, including policies regarding
accession/de-accession process and record keeping, access for visiting scholars, storage
and care concerns, and generally how to run an archaeological lab that maintains large
collections. The archaeologist talking on Thursday is a basket specialist; pay close
attention to how archaeologists and curators handle delicate baskets. Share what you learn
at the Forum in class the following week.
2. Visit the de Young Museum; pay attention to its early “civilizations” collection. Note the
collection from Teotihuacan. How are these artifacts and murals indicative of state level
culture.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fagan, Brian. World Prehistory: A Brief Introduction. 8th Edition. Longman, 2010.
B. Bahn, Paul and Colin Renfrew . Archaeology: Theories, Methods, and Practice. 6th Edition.
Thames and Hudson, 2012.
C. Angeloni, Elvio , ed.. Annual Edition: Archaeology. Dushkin Publishing Group, 2011.
D. Fagan, Brian . Archaeology: A Brief Introduction . Prentice Hall, 2003.
E. Brian Fagan. Ancient Lives: An Introduction to Archaeology and Prehistory. 4th Edition.
Prentice Hall, 2010.
F. Fagan, Brian. People of the Earth: An Introduction to World Pre-History . 13th Edition. Pearson,
2009.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 04/01/2013

