BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 14 - Language and Culture
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of the foundations of linguistic anthropology. Basic concepts, methods, and
forms of analysis associated with linguistic anthropology are covered. Emphases will be placed on
such areas of inquiry as the origins of human language and communication, language acquisition, how
linguists describe and compare different language systems, how historical relationships among the
world's languages are determined, understanding the use of language across social and situational
contexts (sociolinguistics), and cross-cultural communication.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. demonstrate an understanding of the foundations and historical development of Linguistic
Anthropology.
B. identify, describe, and apply concepts associated with descriptive linguistic anthropology (e.g.,
comparative phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, discourse strategies, and culturally
patterned language and communication).
C. summarize various contemporary theoretical models used to explain the evolution and
emergence of human language.
D. describe the basic methods, data collection techniques, and forms of analysis typically
associated with ethnographic research as applied to linguistic anthropology.
E. demonstrate an understanding of important theoretical arguments and models that pertain to
linguistic anthropology, especially as these models address the assumed linkage between
language and culture.
F. apply their basic understanding of linguistic anthropological methods, concepts, forms of
analysis, and theory to the solution of communication problems that emerge in situational and
cross-cultural contexts (i.e. “Applied Linguistic Anthropology”).
G. compare and contrast basic methods and assumptions of formal linguistics as juxtaposed to/with
Linguistic Anthropology.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: Foundations of Linguistic Anthropology
2. The Origins and Evolution of Human Language
3. Language Acquisition and Enculturation: Anthropological Approaches
4. Language Through Time: Comparative and Historical Linguistics
5. How Languages and Communication Systems are Studied
6. Language and Social Context
7. Language, Culture and Meaning
8. Synthesis: Applied Linguistics and Cross-cultural Communication

Hours
8.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
4.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Development of critical learning skills to foster "student based" learning.
G. Directed projects and writing assignments. (Students will be required to write at least 2,500
words through a variety of writing assignments, to be done using a formal research writing style
(e.g. MLA, APA, or Chicago).
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Evaluation of short written assignments (in-class assignments)
C. Written exams (objective and essay formats)
D. Research papers (2,500 word minimum)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article from your supplemental text dealing with ‘linguistic relativity.” While
reading contrast older views of this model with newer perspectives. For example, Edward
Sapir and Benjamin Whorf viewed linguistic relativity as highly influential in terms of
perceptual differentiation. Contrast their views with those more recent perspectives as
outlined by John Gumperz and Guy Deutscher.
2. Read chapter 2 of your text (it focuses on the historical development of linguistics as a
discipline). Be able to contrast the general differences between formal linguistics and
linguistic anthropology. How do the ideas of Noam Chomsky, for example, differ from
those of William Hanks and John Lucy?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three page essay focusing on the relationship between language and culture. How
might understanding this relationship provide a foundation for understanding
cross-cultural communication? Include some discussion of structuralist theories and
syntactic comparisons dealing with Athabascan/Apache verb process (described by Harry
Hoijer and Keith Basso).
2. Write a five page essay summarizing John Lucy’s views on Noam Chomsky’s model for
language. Incorporate into your essay John Lucy’s analysis of Yucatec quantifiers and
mass noun usage. How does Lucy’s body of data argue against Chomsky’s views on
Universal Grammar?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Record five minutes of a TV Sit-Com. Using the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA),
transcribe 2 minutes of verbal text taken from the Sit-Com.
2. Transcribe the same text (mentioned above) using “prosodic notation” instead of IPA.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Zdenek Salzman. Language, Culture and Society: An Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology.
Westview , 2006.
B. Bonvillain, Nancy . Language, Culture, and Communication: The Meaning of Messages .

Prentice Hall , 2006.
C. Findlay, Michael. Language and Communication: A Cross-cultural Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO
(Oxford University Press) , 1998.
D. Findlay, Michael . Speaking of Language & Culture: An Introduction to Linguistic
Anthropology. 2nd Edition. Butte College, 2006.
E. Blum, Susan. Making Sense of Language: Reading in Culture and Commonication. Oxford,
2009.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 02/25/2013

