BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 2H - Honors Physical Anthropology
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2 or concurrent enrollment and Admission to the Honors
Program
Recommended Prep: Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an honors level survey of the foundations of human evolution and variation as viewed
through the lens of physical anthropology. Emphasis is placed on reading primary and secondary
source literature and critical analysis of data presented through the literature. The theory of evolution
as related to questions of human evolution and variation, including the development of human
physical, social, and mental characteristics is the primary focus. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. analyze and synthesize significant global ideas and primary original works and writing;
B. demonstrate critical thinking skills in seminar-type discussions;
C. demonstrate advanced writing skills and critical, creative thinking in composing a minimum of
5000 words in analytical papers and reading responses;
D. generate creative, original responses to course material;
E. demonstrate and apply the foundations of evolutionary theory across a variety of living
communities including extinct and living human groups;
F. compare evolutionary patterns for primates and apply to an understanding of human evolution;
G. apply and synthesize concepts associated with human variation as a means of understanding
biological variation and for challenging the fallacy of race;
H. demonstrate a working knowledge of DNA replication, genetics, and epigenetics.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: Foundations of Physical Anthropology
2. The History of the Theory of Evolution
3. The Biological Basis of Life
4. Human Variation and the Fallacy of Race
5. Primate Evolutionary History (extinct and living primates)
6. Hominid Evolution
7. The Emergence of Human Culture
8. Lessons from the Past: Lessons for the Future
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Written Assignments
F. Practical Evaluations
G. Short papers
H. Essays and research papers
I. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Katharine Milton's article: Diet and Primate Evolution (In, Nutritional
Anthropology: Biocultural Perspectives on Food and Nutrition; Mayfield). Be prepared to
discuss this article in class in terms of implications for human evolution----especially as
related to human cognition.
2. Read Quammen's "The Reluctant Mr. Darwin." Also, know Darwin's limitations. What
didn't he know, given the technological/historical constraints of his day. Secondly, read
"The Neandertal's Necklace," by Juan Luis Arsuaga. Know what the author means by
"exaptation," "problems associated with taxonomic categories," and especially, "symbolic
thinking." Read Stephen Jay Gould's Ever Since Darwin. Apply Gould's understanding of
our current views of evolution to human evolution. Use these works to discuss Darwin's
contributions to the theory of evolution. Be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. There will be three short essays in addition to your final comprehensive paper. Each essay
will be 3 to 5 pages long; please cite references and only use authored sources. First
essay: Describe the synthetic theory of evolution. Contrast this model with the views
(including Darwin's ideas) held by 19th century naturalists. Second, what can an
understanding of primate evolutionary history, primate physiology, and behavior tell us
about human evolution? Finally, based on what you have learned in this class "what does
it mean to be human"? The final paper is based on a topic of your choice as long as the
topic relates to Physical Anthropology.
2. Read the section of your text dealing with the Arboreal Theory. Write a 1-2 page paper on
how living in trees set up patterns for terrestrial life for early human populations.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend the Forensic Conference being held this weekend at CSU Chico. The conference
includes a tour of the human identification lab. Be prepared to present your summary

description of this experience in class.
2. Attend this week's Anthropology Forum at CSU Chico. The speaker is Pete Wheeler who
specializes in human evolution and hair loss among modern humans. Be prepared to
discuss his basic thesis in our class group discussion on aspects of human physiology and
evolution.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Jurmain, R. Kilgore, L. W. Trevathan. Essentials of Physical Anthropology. 9th Edition.
Wadsworth, 2012.
B. Park, Michael. Biological Anthropology. 7th Edition. McGraw Hill, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/03/2014

