BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 18 - World Cultures
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of the world's culture areas as described and conceptualized by cultural
anthropologists. While the course has a significant geographical component, emphasis is placed on an
anthropological perspective on cultural dynamics in terms of general subsistence patterns,
sociopolitical organization, and the increased globalization over time of the world's cultural systems.
Societal types such as hunter gatherers, horticulturalists, pastoralists, intensive agriculturalists, and
industrialists are described and compared from an anthropological perspective. Culture contact and
change models are also included as a substantive part of the course content.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify all major world culture areas and the major cultural traditions associated with each of
them (culture areas).
B. define and recount environmental, sociocultural, and biological factors that contribute to the
formation of societal types across time and space.
C. demonstrate proficiency at identifying and applying theories of culture change and contact as
these inform an understanding of emergent global cultural systems.
D. locate and distinguish major world culture areas (eg Africa, Mesoamerica, Oceania, etc.) on a
global level.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: Background
2. Descriptive Methods and Theoretical Approaches to World Cultures
3. Societal Types: Bands, Tribes, Chiefdoms, and States
4. The South Pacific: Polynesian, Micronesian, and Melanesian Traditions
5. Southern Asia: India, Australia, and Southeast Asia
6. Asia Proper: China, Japan, Korea, and the Siberian Steppes
7. The Middle East
8. Africa
9. Western and Eastern Europe
10. North America
11. Central and South America
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Strategies for developing critical thinking and inquiry skills will be
employed.
G. Directed projects including writing assignments (2,500 word minimum
word requirement); students will be required to use formal research
methods and write their papers using an established writing style (e.g.
MLA, APA or Chicago).
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Evaluations of short writing assignments
D. Formal research papers (2,500 word minimum)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter from your text that explains how modern dynamic models for cultural
regions are more useful than the older more static models. Be able to discuss problems
associated with the “culture area” approach.
2. Read the chapter in your book that focuses on the emergence of agriculture in the fertile
crescent area (ca. 5,000 B.C.). Be able to discuss “monocausality” and the limitations of
such theories with regard to understanding culture change.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay summarizing the “culture area” approach. How has the cultural ecological
approach, developed by Julian Steward and others, forced us to be suspicious of strict
culture area organization when analyzing regional differences.
2. Write an essay (five pages) summarizing the work of V. Gordon Childe and Robert
Braidwood. How do their views differ from those of Kent Flannery?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Sit in on a "World Regions” geography course on campus. Obtain the instructor’s
permission first. How are the regional models used by cultural geographers similar to
those used by regional archaeologists? Both disciplines use remote sensing to generate
specific types of maps. How might archaeologists and cultural anthropologists make use
of maps taken from remote imagery data?
2. Using Google Earth (computers in the library if you don’t have one at home) create a map
showing major urban areas through time in central China: compare urban scale from 1950
to the present.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bodley, John H. . Cultural Anthropology: Tribes, States, and the Global Systems. 6th Edition.
Mayfield, 2010.
B. Angeloni, Elvio . Annual Editions: Cultural Anthropology . Dushkin Publication Group, 2011.

Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Goddies Atlas

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 02/25/2013

