BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 34 - Native Americans Today
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of contemporary issues associated with Native American culture process. The
course will focus on economic, political, health, and identify issues as these reflect changes in
sociocultural dynamics for Native American populations, from roughly the 1890s through to the
present. In addition, the course will focus on legal strategies and actual responses taken by various
activist Native American groups as a function of cultural adaptation to Euroamerican westward
expansion and subsequent domination of North America.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. describe and summarize the basic history and culture contact situations associated with Native
American/Euroamerican history (starting in 1492 , but will focus especially on the time frame
from 1890 to the present).
B. demonstrate knowledge of the dynamics of culture conflict and resolution as these unfolded
across North America from the Colonial Period to modern times. Anthropological models for
understanding culture contact and change will be addressed.
C. identify and conceptualize various contemporary issues related to socioeconomics, health care,
education, and politics as these pertain to modern Native Americans.
D. demonstrate knowledge and the application of past treaties to contemporary legal contexts and
how various treaties impact Native American communities today.
E. discuss issues pertaining to various Native American movements that have been active at
various times in American history (especially since WWII).
F. critique common stereotypes of Native Americans; critiques should draw from actual
ethnohistoric data.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: The Concept of Culture, Native American and European
Traditions
2. Cultures in Contact and Conflict
3. Wars, Treaties, and More Wars
4. Ideological Systems: Manifest Destiny as a Cultural Justification for
Genocide
5. Early Movements: Revitalization and the Ghost Dance
6. The Case of Ishi
7. From Conflict to Tragic Figures: The Early 20th Century
8. WWII: Off the Reservation
9. Modern Movements: From the NCAI to AIM to the Pan Indian Movement

Hours
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00

10. The Contemporary Situation: Health, Economics, Education, Land Rights
and other Modern Situations
Total Hours

6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Students will be required to
write the equivalent of 2,500 words in the form of formally written essays/research papers
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Evaluations of short written assignments
D. Formal research papers (2,500 word minimum)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article in your supplemental text focusing on the formation of the National
Congress of American Indians (NCAI). Why was this organization formed? What
subsequently happened to the NCAI?
2. Read the article in your supplemental text dealing with the complexities of cultural
identity. Explain (through discussion) why “acculturation scales” do not work as a method
for measuring cultural identity or “ethnicity.” How are Native American legal identities
worked out today?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three page essay outlining the birth and growth of Indian Gaming in the United
States. Include both positive and negative views on the future of native gaming.
2. Write a summary of the basic underlying agreements outlined in the Treaty of Laramie.
Include cases where the treaty of Laramie has been used as a viable legal document in
contemporary contexts.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Preview the documentary “AIM and the occupation of Alcatraz.” Be able to discuss how
this event is viewed today by various Native American scholars.
2. Attend a local Mechoopda Tribal Council meeting. Obtain permission first. Report the
general discussion to our class. What, in general do the Mechoopda have to say about the
future of a Mechoopda Cultural History museum?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Waldman, Carl . Atlas of the North American Indian. Facts on File, 2010.
B. Huratado, Albert and Iverson, Peter. Major Problems in American Indian History. 3rd Edition.
D.C. Heath and Company, 2008.
C. Kehoe, Alice B.. North American Indians: A Comprehensive Account. 4th Edition. Prentice
Hall, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 02/25/2013

