BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 4H - Honors Cultural Anthropology
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2 or concurrent enrollment and Admission to the Honors
Program
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This is an Honors level introductory cultural anthropology course. Emphasis is placed on the
importance of recognizing and understanding culture as a dynamic and adaptive force underlying a
significant degree of human behavior and thinking. As an Honors course primary ethnographic
sources (descriptions of distinctive human communities) and classic works summarizing culture
theory will be used. Major thematic units of study include definitional and theoretical issues pertaining
to culture, ethnographic method, linguistic anthropology, culture/personality, subsistence systems,
social organization, political organization, economics, beliefs, culture contact, and applied
anthropology. This course emphasizes culture process and cross-cultural comparisons as seen through
the lens of cultural anthropology. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. analyze and synthesize significant global ideas and primary original works and writing;
B. demonstrate critical thinking skills in seminar-type discussions;
C. demonstrate advanced writing skills and critical, creative thinking in composing a minimum of
5,000 words in analytical papers and reading responses;
D. generate creative, original responses to course material;
E. describe and summarize a comprehensive body of knowledge pertaining to the foundations of
cultural anthropology;
F. describe and analyze cultural anthropological perspectives across a range of important thematic
areas including cultural relativism, cross-cultural patterns associated with subsistence,
economics, social organization, and world view;
G. review and critique ethnocentric views of human culture and history providing a broad based
"holistic" perspective of humanity;
H. describe the consequences of extreme culture contact situations and the impact that colonization
and globalization has had on small-scale traditional societies;
I. apply the knowledge obtained in this course to solutions for human based problems (applied
anthropology);
J. analyze and synthesize significant works (ethnographic case studies) related to cross-cultural
research;
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Cultural Anthropology
2. The Historical Development of Anthropological Thought
3. Language, Culture and Thought
4. Culture and Personality (Psychological Anthropology)

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00

5. Subsistence
6. Economic Systems
7. Social Organization
8. Political Organization
9. Beliefs and World View
10. Applied Anthropology
Total Hours

6.00
4.00
7.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Collaborative Group Work
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Papers
C. Oral Presentation
D. Written Assignments
E. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an ethnography of your choice from the selected list and apply to various theoretical
orientations as discussed in class.
2. Read Marvin Harris's Material Culture. Apply his ideas to your selected ethnography.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Compose a comprehensive 15 page research paper where you identify a problem taken
from your ethnography and, based on our discussion of Applied Anthropology, propose a
solution.
2. Write a 3 page essay summarizing the following theoretical models; functionalism,
structuralism, and cultural relativism.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct an ethnographic interview of a senior citizen.
2. Organize a set of field notes based on your observation of a TV sitcom.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Harris, M. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. 3rd Edition. Altamira, 2001.
B. Bodley, John. Cultural Anthropology: Tribes, States, and the Global System. 5th Edition. Alta
Mira Press, 2011.
C. Ember, Carol and Melvin. Cultural Anthropology. 13th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/03/2014

