BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 17 - Introduction to Linguistics
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level V
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of linguistics. The focus is on the description, analysis, and theoretical
modeling of various world language systems. Topics will include an introduction to the field of
linguistics, the historical development of linguistic inquiry, language acquisition,
historical/comparative linguistics and world language systems, phonology, language morphology,
syntax, semantics, language in social context(s), discourse analysis, theoretical orientations, literacy
process, and applied linguistics. Content for this course will be derived from the work of scholars
around the world, including the distinctive contributions of women linguists with a focus on gender
and language.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. describe and summarize the basic foundations of linguistic inquiry.
B. apply forms of linguistic description and analysis across areas of linguistic concern such as
language acquisition, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, and extended forms of
discourse.
C. review and apply various theoretical models such as those used to explain the nature of
language, comparative and historical linguistics, and the structure of language.
D. describe and analyze linguistics and literacy texts as they occur across social contexts.
E. apply linguistic forms of analysis and explanation to the solution of language based human
problems (Applied Linguistics).
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Linguistics
2. The Development of Lingusitics as a Field of Study
3. Comparative and Historical Linguistics
4. Language Acquisition
5. Phonology and Phonetics
6. Morphology
7. Syntax
8. Semantics
9. Language and Social Context(s)
10. Applied Linguistics
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Writing Assignments: students will be required 1500 words in the form of formal papers and
essays.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Written Assignments
C. Written Examinations
D. Essays and research papers
E. Tests (objective)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1.
1. Read Malcolm Coulthard’s article on Discourse Analysis.”
2. Read the chapter (chapter three) that summarizes the key ideas associated with
Transformational Generative Grammar.
3. Read the article that focuses on the development of historical/comparative
linguistics.
4. Read the chapter (chapter six) that deals with various theoretical models for
language acquisition.
B. Writing Assignments
1.
1. Write a three page essay focusing on Edward Sapir’s article “The Psychological
Reality of Phonemes.” Why did this article shift descriptive phonology away from
phonetic transcription?
2. Compose a five page essay focusing on theoretical perspectives on syntax. Include
the ideas ideas of Noam Chomsky, Paul Postal, and George Lakoff.
3. Write a three page essay that summarizes the key ideas associated with Speech Act
theory. Include ideas associated with J.L Austin, John Searle, and Dell Hymes.
4. Write a three page essay describing “Discourse Analysis” as a method and
interpretive tool for linguistic analysis.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1.

1. Record 10 minutes of a TV situation comedy. Transcribe the segment using the
International Phonetic Alphabet (IIPA) with attention to the way speakers actually
pronounce sounds Also, isolate all morphemes (free and bound).
2. With permission only, record a conversation with a friend. Isolate individual speech
acts and analyze according to locution, illocution, and perlocution.
3. Record or graphically describe code-switching as it occurs in everyday situations.
Use the TV or note code –switching as it occurs in public places (e.g. restaurants, at
school, and so forth). Describe the conditions under which code-switching occurs.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Blum, Susan. Making Sense of Language. 1st Edition. Oxford University Press, 2009.
B. O'Grady, William, Dobrovolsky, Michael, Aronoff, Mark. Contemporary Linguistics: An
Introduction. 3rd Edition. St. Martin's Press, 2009.
C. Salzmann, Zdenek. Language, Culture and Society. 4th Edition. Westview, 2007.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 11/15/2010

