BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 4 - Cultural Anthropology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course explores how anthropologists study and compare human culture. Cultural anthropologists
seek to understand the broad arc of human experience focusing on a set of central issues: how people
around the world make their living (subsistence patterns); how they organize themselves socially,
politically and economically; how they communicate; how they relate to each other through family
and kinship ties; what they believe about the world (belief systems); how they express themselves
creatively (expressive culture); how they make distinctions among themselves such as through
applying gender, racial and ethnic identity labels; how they have shaped and been shaped by social
inequalities such as colonialism; and how they navigate culture change and processes of globalization
that affect us all. Ethnographic case studies highlight these similarities and differences, and introduce
students to how anthropologists do their work, employ professional anthropological research ethics
and apply their perspectives and skills to understand humans around the globe. (C-ID ANTH 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define the scope of anthropology and discuss the role of cultural anthropology within the
discipline.
B. Recognize the methods, theories and perspectives used to study and understand human cultures.
C. Explain the importance of the ethnographic method in the study of culture.
D. Employ the relativist perspective while discussing cultural variation.
E. Demonstrate an understanding of anthropological concepts including ethnicity, gender, political
organization, economic systems, kinship, rituals and belief systems.
F. Explain the interconnectedness of the economic, political and sociocultural forces of
globalization amongst diverse cultural groups.
G. Analyze and evaluate the ethical issues anthropologists encounter, and professional ethical
obligations that must be met in the study of and application in cultural groups different from
their own.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Anthropological theories, methods and perspectives
2. Anthropological study of human cultures in comparative perspective
3. Subsistence patterns
4. Social, political and economic organizations
5. Language and communication
6. Family and kinship
7. Belief systems
8. Art and expressive culture

Hours
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50

9. Ethnicity and race
10. Gender and sexuality
11. Social inequality and colonialism
12. Globalization and culture change
13. Professional ethics
14. Applied anthropology
Total Hours

3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
J. Writing assignments. Students will be required to write 2,500 words or more through formal
research based writing assignments.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Written Assignments
C. Written Examinations
D. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article from Conformity and Conflict that focuses on anthropological definitions
of culture. Be prepared to discuss why the concept of culture is so important to an
understanding of human behavior—and why, to a significant degree, “culture” is
deemphasized or left out in human behavior modeling in so many social and behavioral
sciences.
2. Read the article from Conformity and Conflict that deals with the foundations of cultural
relativism. Note, for purposes of discussion how cultural relativism has changed over the
years; compare and contrast these views through contrasting Franz Boas with Marvin
Harris.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a five page essay on the history of anthropological thought focusing on Bronislaw
Malinowski’s concept of culture as integrated. Contrast his concept with Gregory
Bateson’s concept of the “holistic fallacy.”
2. Write a three page essay based on your social organization article. Compare and contrast
at least two of the societies described in the article.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a session of the Anthropology Forum at the local University (CSU Chico). This
week’s forum is a panel discussion (made up of some members of the anthropology
department at CSU Chico) on reflexivity in ethnographic research. Note how various
panel discussants handled issues of "observer obtrusive" and "non-obtrusive" descriptive

data as a problem for field work.
2. Attend the American Association of Anthropology’s national meeting. Attend the session
dealing with food production in Sub-Saharan Africa. Current attempts by international
organizations have failed to assist people living in this region. Why? What insights can
applied anthropologist offer that might make assistance programs more successful with
regard to food production and distribution in this region?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Ember, Carol and Melvin. Cultural Anthropology . 12th Edition. Prentice Hall , 2010.
B. Bailey, Garrick and Peoples, James. Essentials of Cultural Anthropology. Wadsworth , 2011.
C. Rotating editors. Annual Editions: Cultural Anthropology. Dushkin, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/04/2013

