BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ANTH 32 - Native Americans
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is designed to provide students with a detailed knowledge of prehistoric and early historic
cultures of the Native Americans of North America. This will include the study of their origins,
language families, traditional and transitional cultural patterns, the impact of Euroamerican
populations, and a survey of the various natural and cultural regions of North America.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. demonstrate a basic understanding of anthropological methods and concepts as these pertain to
the study of precontact and post contact North American Native populations.
B. demonstrate a clear understanding of specific concepts, and factual knowledge regarding the
distribution and cultural behavior of various Native American societies (e.g. Algonkian, Apache,
Maidu, Inuit, to name a few). This will include an understanding of the cultural dynamics of
subsistence practices, social organization, and indigenous Native American world view(s).
C. summarize the history of various Native American groups in terms of their historic contact with
Euroamericans. This will include discussions focused on culture contact process.
D. discuss contemporary issues associated with modern Native American groups.
E. critique stereotypes of Native Americans and provide insight about Native Americans based on
actual ethnohistoric data.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: Diversity, Culture Areas, Time Frames, and the Populating of
the Americas
2. The Development of States: Mesoamerica and the Classic Southwest
3. The Southeast
4. The Northeastern Woodlands
5. The Plains Nations
6. The Southwest
7. California and the Great Basin
8. The Columbia Plateau and the Subarctic
9. The Arctic Cultures
10. The Pacific Northwest
11. Contemporary Issues
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Strategies for developing critical thinking and inquiry skills will be
used.
G. Directed projects including writing assignments (2,500 word minimum word
requirement); students will be required to use formal research methods and
write their papers using an established writing style (e.g. MLA, APA, or
Chicago).
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Evaluations of short writing assignments
D. Formal research papers (2,500 word minimum)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the first chapter in the Atlas of North American Indians; this chapter focuses on
major tribal areas before European contact. Plot out the original regions with the location
of present day reservations and be able to discuss this in class.
2. Read the article dealing with recent archaeological discoveries pushing back the date of
the arrival of the first humans in the New World. Be prepared to summarize the dates
associated with major archaeological sites mentioned in the article (e.g. Meadowcroft,
Monte Verde, Cactus Hill, among others).
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay on the Apache Wars. Take the perspective of the Apache in terms of land
rights. Focus on the case of Geronimo. Who was he? How is his case a microcosm of
what happened to the Apachean groups in general?
2. Write a five page essay discussing the case of Ishi, the last Yahi. Who were the Yahi?
Why was Ishi the last one. In your essay please include why this case demonstrates how
modern civilization can be, despite modern inventions and so called high culture (art
music etc.), quite cruel and aggressive.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Traditional Native America dancers from various tribal groups will be visiting campus on
Thursday; please attend their performance (1pm in quad area). Look up literature on dance
variations as expressed from different tribal affiliations.
2. Attend a viewing of Captain Jack’s War, showing in Chico this weekend. Be prepared to
discuss your observations in class. Focus on why these Native Americans (Modoc and
others) were put in this predicament? Also, note the prevailing views held by the military
regarding Captain Jack and his followers.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fagan, Brian. The First North Americans. Thomas & Hudson, 2011.
B. Maxwell, James . America’s Fascinating Indian Heritage. revised Edition. Reader’s Digest.,

2002.
C. Calloway, Colin . First Peoples: A Documentary Survey of American Indian History.
Bedford/St Martin’s. , 1999.
D. Kehoe, Alice B.. North American Indians: A Comprehensive Account. 4th Edition. Prentice
Hall, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 02/25/2013

