BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 6 - African, Oceanic, and Native American Art History Survey
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of visual culture within select regions in Africa, Oceania, and indigenous North
America. (C-ID ARTH 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify, examine, and assess representative works of art and architecture from the art historical
periods covered in this course employing appropriate art historical terminology
B. Analyze, discuss, and differentiate works of art and architecture in terms of historical context
and cultural values
C. Analyze, discuss, and distinguish the roles of art, architecture, and the artist form the art
historical periods covered in this course
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the discipline of Art History, aesthetics, and connoisseurship.
The following units are concerned with the reading and interpretation of the
visual language of art and architecture in each region, and the understanding
of the religious social, political meaning and functions of these works.
2. Africa: Rock Art, prehistoric to present, Sub Sahara,West Africa,
East Africa, South Africa
3. Oceania: Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia, Australia
4. Native Americas: South America, Mesoamerica,
North America
Total Hours

Hours
1.00

17.00
16.00
17.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Trips
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. "Hands-on" class projects
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Class participation

B. Class participation
C. Class Discussion
D. Written Essays and/or Research Projects
E. Essay Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about the Yoruba Egungun ceremony in the text and come to class prepared to
discuss its visual language and context.
2. Read the Handout on Aesthetics in African Art and be prepared to discuss the evidence
employed by the author to support the thesis that Africans apply aesthetic principals in the
creation and critique of the creations.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay comparing the visual language, functions, and meanings of temple
paintings of the Kings of Dahomey and the murals from the Tepantitla at Teotihuacan.
2. Write an essay describing the materials used in the creation of Navajo Drypainting, and
the process of its creation.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the Kwakwaka’wakw’s Umista Cultural Center and prepare to discuss its
significance.
2. Research Asmat Bisj Poles and prepare to discuss their making process and function.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. O’Riley, Michael Kampen. Art Beyond the West. 2nd Edition. Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 2006.
B. Kleiner, Fred S.. Gardner's Art through the Ages: Non-Western Perspectives. 13th Edition.
Wadsworth Publishing, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 12/03/2012

