BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 52 - Intermediate Ceramics
Prerequisite(s): ART 50
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an exploration of clay as a medium of expression, using the potter's wheel and/or
hand-building techniques to create sculptural and functional forms. Students will continue to develop
techniques in basic wheel-throwing and/or hand-building, clay body formulation, surface enrichment
techniques, and kiln firing. Students will also become familiar with historical as well as contemporary
ceramic artworks.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the various types of clays, glazes, firing techniques, and elements of kiln design used
in ceramics.
B. Design and create clay forms using a variety of forming techniques, such as wheel-throwing,
coil, slab, pinch, extrusions, and combination methods.
C. Utilize glaze formulation and techniques of application to successfully achieve finished surfaces
with desired colors, textures, and design elements.
D. Create artworks that are informed by the historical and contemporary uses of the ceramic
medium for sculpture and pottery.
E. Create a body of finished work that is responsive to assigned projects, and that demonstrates
technical proficiency, creative problem-solving, and self-expression.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction, Orientation
2. Historical and Contemporary Precedents in Ceramics
3. Handbuilding Techniques and Terminology
4. Introduction to Throwing larger forms
5. Bowl Forms
6. Flat Shapes on the Wheel
7. Round Shapes on the Wheel
8. Aesthetics of Wheel Thrown Forms
9. Glaze Calculation and Application
10. Surface Embellishments
11. Special Throwing Techniques
12. Firing Techniques: Oxidation vs. Reduction
13. Portfolio Development: Photo-documentation of artwork for professional

Hours
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.50
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00

13. Portfolio Development: Photo-documentation of artwork for professional
quality presentation to secure admission to 4-Year programs, scholarships,
gallery representation, and/or direct sales
Total Hours

2.00

25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Visual problem solving exercises that develop ceramic work and require
exploration and manipulation of the basic materials used to create ceramic
work
2. Studio projects that explore the techniques and organizing principles of
ceramics including but not limited to pinch, coil, soft slab, hard slab,
sgraffito, mishima, modeling, carving, and wheel work
3. Development of skills and processes using a variety of surface and firing
techniques appropriate to an intermediate study in ceramics, which may
include but are not limited to slips, engobe, terra sigilata, glaze, burnishing,
in various firing atmospheres and temperatures
4. Portfolio Development: Photo-documentation of artwork for professional
quality presentation to secure admission to 4-Year programs, scholarships,
gallery representation, and/or direct sales
5. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects
Total Hours

Hours
6.50

36.00

20.00

4.00

10.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Portfolios
D. Projects
E. Class participation
F. Lab Projects
G. Practical Evaluations
H. Class Discussion
I. Critiques will be given on work in progress as well as finished work.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Prior to attending class during which wheel-throwing is demonstrated, read about
wheel-throwing techniques in the textbook "Hands in Clay", and write down some
questions for the instructor to answer during and after the demonstration.
2. Read about the uses of clay by early civilizations of Western Asia and the Mediterranean

in the textbook "Hands In Clay". Come to class prepared to discuss possible influences
that these historical precedents might have on your own work.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Keep a journal in which you write entries describing the evolution of form and concept for
all assigned clay projects.
2. Pick a ceramic artist whose work you find especially intriguing. Write a one to two page
paper describing, interpreting, and evaluating two of of the artists' best works in
comparison. What are the elements of this artist's personal style?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View the color plates that are presented in the textbook "Hands in Clay". Pick an artwork
pictured there that you regard as worthy of emulation. Make a piece that is similar in form
but which includes distinctively personal twist.
2. Attend a local or regional art show or an exhibition at an art museum to get ideas for
sculptural forms. Take photographs (where permitted) or make sketches of forms you are
interested in for future reference.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Speight, Charlotte; Toki, John. Hands in Clay : An Introduction to Ceramics. 5th Edition.
McGraw-Hill Humanities/Social Sciences/Languages, 2003.
B. Peterson, Susan and Peterson, Jan. Working with Clay. 3rd Edition. Laurence King, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Students will purchase their own clay and tools.

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 12/03/2012

