BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 8 - Basic Drawing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to principles, elements, and practices of drawing, employing a wide
range of subject matter and drawing media. Focus on perceptually based drawing, observational skills,
technical abilities, and creative responses is placed on materials and subject matter.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Observe and accurately render three-dimensional objects on a two-dimensional surface.
B. Create drawings that demonstrate the basic principles of spatial illusion through the application
of linear, atmospheric, and other perspective systems.
C. Utilize a variety of lines and mark making in drawing.
D. Organize spaces and objects within a drawing according to basic principles of design and
composition.
E. Accurately describe forms and space through gradations of value.
F. Utilize and apply a wide range of drawing materials and techniques
G. Develop expressive content through manipulation of line, form, value, and composition.
H. Evaluate and critique class projects using relevant terminology in oral or written formats.
I. Examine and describe historical and contemporary developments, trends, materials, and
approaches in drawing.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Observational skills and proportional measurement
2. Basic principles of spatial illusion including linear, atmospheric, and other
perspective systems
3. Use of a variety of line and mark making approaches in drawing
4. Development and application of composition (design and organization) in
drawing
5. Use of value and planes to describe forms and space
6. Introduction to and use of a variety of drawing materials and techniques
7. Development of expressive content through manipulation of line, form,
value, and composition
8. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects using relevant terminology
in oral or written formats
9. Historical and contemporary developments, critical trends, materials, and
approaches in drawing
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
4.50
2.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Drawing from observation
2. Application of perspective concepts
3. Assignments and exercises related to line, value, form, composition,
perspective, and the use and application of materials
4. Critique and evaluation of drawing assignments and exercises
Total Hours

Hours
30.00
6.50
30.00
10.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Class Critiques
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Demonstration
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Mid-term and final examinations
G. Portfolio of completed work
H. Group and individual critiques in oral or written formats
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter "Perceiving the Shape of a Space: The Positive Aspects of Negative Space"
in "Drawing on the Right Hand Side of the Brain". Execute a still life using only the
negative spaces surrounding the objects also with consideration of the borders of the
paper.
2. Review the instructor generated handout on "Why Keep a Sketchbook". Write a summary
of the reasons to keep a sketchbook as presented in the handout.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After completing a portrait of someone you know using the analogous drawing method
make a list finishing these sentences to describe what you have learned from your
drawing. What I now see is that… What I didn't realize about this person is that… I am
surprised by… I didn't really understand before that…
2. In your sketchbook answer the 10 instructor generated questions pertaining to the finished
pen and ink drawing assignments taped up around the room in front of you. The questions
will address variation in width and length of line, direction and motion, details, texture,
negative space, and any perceived symbol making. You will be called upon at random to
answer these questions.

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. From the instructor generated list of local galleries, pick one and visit it. Write a one page
paper describing the work in the exhibit using the drawing terminology learned in class.
2. Pick a corner of a room in your living space. By using the "sighting method" learned in
class draw a composition from the corner of the room by adding lines depicting the
furniture, things on the walls, and doors or windows to make a composition in perspective.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Drawing Materials such as pencils, crayons, chalk, and support materials.

Created/Revised by: Simone Senat
Date: 12/03/2012

