BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 19 - Advanced Painting
Prerequisite(s): ART 18
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This is an advanced painting course. Students continue practicing the techniques of painting, focusing
on the development of advanced technical skills and advanced applications of materials and processes
using paint and mixed media.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate advanced technical skills and knowledge of materials and processes using paint and
mixed media.
B. Demonstrate a familiarity with a variety of local, national, and internationally acclaimed artists'
artworks.
C. Formulate a personal painting philosophy and artist statement.
D. Critique paintings individually and in groups.
E. Describe paintings and art concepts with a professional art-related vocabulary.
F. Demonstrate safe handling of studio painting materials and equipment.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Palette arrangement and color mixing using warm and cool colors, including
neutrals
2. The use of contrast and values of color and the gray scale within a
composition
3. Compositions involving a understanding of personal self-expression with
relationship to content
4. Construct and prepare large painting surfaces and supports
5. Develop expressive content through the manipulation of paint and mixed
media in a unique personal style
6. Incorporate historical and contemporary developments, trends, materials,
and approaches in painting
7. Development of an artist statement and personal philosophy
8. Assess and critique paintings in group, individual, and written contexts using
relevant critique formats, concepts and terminology
9. Safely handle and use studio painting materials and equipment
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
1.50
4.00
2.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Utilizing a working knowledge of the color wheel, mix secondary,
terteriary, and neutral colors from the primary warm and cool color palette
2. Construct and prepare painting surfaces, large and small with attention to
surface texture and canvas shape
3. Create a series of formal paintings based on developed personal style and
content
4. Assess and critique paintings in group, individual, and written contexts
using relevant critique formats, concepts and terminology
5. Develop a personal artist statement
Total Hours

Hours
15.00
11.00
30.00
15.00
5.50
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Class Critiques
G. Visits to art galleries
H. Guests demonstrations by local artists
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Demonstration
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Written or Oral Examinations
G. Practical Evaluations
H. Formal critique
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Choose and read an article from a recent issue of "Art In America" or "Art Forum." Take
notes and be prepared to share with the class the contents of this article.
2. Research three contemporary artists that you believe have similar qualities to your own
work. Take notes and be prepared to discuss your answers in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Critique your painting based on the four C's (Content, Color, Composition, and Contrast).
Describe the interconnection of these terms and the overall success of your work.
2. Create a personal Artist Statement about your work this semester. Include information
describing your choice of context and color and how this relates to your compositions as a
whole.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the term Dada. Describe this term, the key artists involved, and the time period
and place in which it was developed. Provide two examples of current events that you
believe could fit into the framework of Dadism.

believe could fit into the framework of Dadism.
2. Choose two historically well-known artists from different art movements, and compare
and contrast the similarities and differences in one of their works.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Brushes
B. Sponges, rags, Viva paper towels
C. Paper
D. Stretch canvas
E. Paint
F. Palette

Created/Revised by: Simone Senat
Date: 12/03/2012

