BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 36 - Illustration Art II
Prerequisite(s): ART 35
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This is an intermediate course in illustration that focuses on the application of traditional and digital
techniques. Students design and produce real-world client projects. Students are also introduced to the
business of illustration and career paths for illustrators.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate technical proficiency in the use of materials, tools and software to produce
real-world client projects.
B. Use appropriate terminology in describing illustration and its functions and purposes.
C. Analyze and examine the field of illustration. This examination would include investigation of
the functions of illustration in various cultures and business models.
D. Discuss the types of demands and disciplines required to be competitive in the illustration fields
and design industries.
E. Develop and assemble a personal resume and portfolio of illustration projects.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Career paths and job market overview
2. Successful illustrators critique
3. Overview of individuals skills for print and digital illustration
4. Illustration techniques for product design
5. Self promotion
6. Resume and portfolio preparation
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
5.00
6.00
5.00
6.00
6.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Job market study for viable illustration career paths
2. Successful illustrators critique
3. Overview and practice of individuals skills
4. Illustration techniques for products
5. Self promotion
6. Resume and portfolio preparation

Hours
8.00
8.00
11.00
8.00
8.00
8.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Class discussion
E. Reading
F. Research
G. Critiques
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Projects
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Critique
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read biographies of three illustrators and share their education, client projects and past
work history with the class.
2. Read handout on illustration techniques supplied by the instructor. Incorporate one chosen
technique in a visual design.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a book from the list supplied by the instructor. Design a front and back book cover.
Write the back cover blurbs for the book.
2. Write a one-page paper on a selected illustrator. Incorporate into a magazine design.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using natural elements gathered from the outside, create an illustration using these
elements and photograph the illustrations to share with the class.
2. Research three YouTube videos on illustration speed drawings. Share your finding with
the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Various drawing materials as recommended by the instructor

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly
Date: 02/04/2013

