BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 60 - Beginning Sculpture
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to three-dimensional sculptural principles, techniques, and concepts
utilizing a wide range of materials and practices. Various sculpture methods are practiced with
attention to creative self-expression and historical context.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Express aesthetic or conceptual intents in various three dimensional media that may include
several of the following, but are not limited to: plaster, clay, wood, stone, glass, bronze, iron,
steel, concrete and the use of digital technologies such as 3D printers and scanners.
B. Produce sculpture projects using the basic tools and forming techniques of sculpture
(manipulative, substitution, subtractive, additive, fabrication, assemblage etc.) in a safe and
appropriate manner.
C. Display basic skills and craftsmanship in sculpture media using the formal principles of design
and visual elements.
D. Create sculptural works that demonstrate understanding of representational, abstract,
non-objective, or conceptual imagery.
E. Examine and describe historical and contemporary developments, trends, materials, and
approaches in sculpture.
F. Assess and critique sculptural works in group, individual, and written contexts using relevant
critique formats, concepts and terminology.
G. Safely utilize tools and specialized equipment.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lecture
Topics
1. Major sculptural principles including but not limited to subtractive, additive,
fabrication, construction, assemblage, substitution/casting, installation, and
digitally based processes
2. Introduction to representational, abstract, non-objective, and conceptually
based imagery
3. Development of vocabulary specific to sculpture
4. Introduction to sculptural materials including but not limited to clay, metal,
plaster, stone, found objects etc.
5. Creative thinking, problem solving, and decision-making skills used in the

Hours
2.50

2.50
2.50
2.50
2.50

5. Creative thinking, problem solving, and decision-making skills used in the
visual arts
6. Formal visual elements and principles of design
7. Appreciation, interpretation and understanding of both Western and
Non-Western artworks with an emphasis on the impact of historical,
contemporary, cultural, and physical contexts of sculptural works
8. Analysis and criticism of sculptural works in oral and written contexts using
relevant critique formats, concepts, and terminology
9. Studio equipment, tool use, maintenance, and safety
10. Contemporary trends, materials, and approaches in sculpture and
three-dimensional art
Total Hours

2.50
2.50
2.50

2.50
2.50
3.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Problem solving vuisual exercises that develop 3-Dimensional awareness
and require exploration and manipulation of the basic material used to ceate
sculpture
2. Studio projects that explore the elements and organizing principles of
three-dimensional design including but not limited to the use of additive,
substractive, substitution, fabrication, assemblage, digital, etc.
3. Studio projects that include, but are not limited to, the use of
representational, abstract, non-objective and conceptual imagery
4. Development of skill and processes using a variety of artistic materials,
techniques and tools appropriate to an introductory study of sculpture, which
may include, but are not limited to: paper, wood, plaster, wire, metal, clay,
fibers, mixed media
5. Safe use of tools and specialized equipment
Total Hours

Hours
10.00

20.00

20.00
20.00

6.50
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Field Trips
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Demonstrations
I. Problem-Solving Sessions
J. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects

E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Handout on Materials & Techniques and prepare to discuss the information in class.
2. Read Anxious Visions, Surrealist Art, segment on Max Ernst, Hans Bellmer, and Man
Ray. Take notes on these artists' creative processes and prepare to discuss the similarities
and differences to your creative process in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an in-class critique on the artwork of your classmates. Apply the elements of art and
design principles in your critique and determine meaning based on your reading of visual
language.
2. Write an essay on a three-dimensional art work on display in the Butte College Art
Gallery. Analyze the visual language and material use as it pertains to the content of the
work.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research an assigned 20th/21st century three-dimensional artist in conjunction with class
lecture on design elements and technical instruction in the production of
three-dimensional artworks, and apply those elements and techniques to assigned project.
2. Research the Performance Artist Guillermo Gomez Pena and prepare to discuss his
working methods, materials, and installations in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Clay, resin, wood, metal, wire, glue, fiber, cardboard, found objects, hot glue gun, clay carving
tools, and other tools and materials as needed based on projects.
B. Books, films, and periodicals located in the ARTS Resource Center.

Created/Revised by: Alexandra O'Neil
Date: 12/03/2012

