BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 11 - Intermediate Drawing
Prerequisite(s): ART 8
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an exploration of artistic concepts, styles, and creative expression related to
intermediate-level drawing, focusing on complex subject matter and concepts using a variety of
drawing mediums, techniques, and methodologies. Students in this course will build on fundamental
drawing skills to develop personalized approaches to content and materials in exercises covering
multiple historical and contemporary approaches to drawing. (C-ID ARTS 205).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Produce drawings that creatively interpret and apply formal design elements in the production of
images in a wide range of media, formats, and surfaces.
B. Design and produce a portfolio of drawings in multiple mediums and formats that successfully
demonstrates: subjective and expressive uses of value, techniques and concepts of abstraction or
non-objective art, experimentation with combinations of wet and dry mediums, observational,
expressive, and conceptual analysis or application of color, application and drawing techniques
for a variety of color media, non-traditional compositions, formats, surfaces and materials,
conceptually oriented approaches to drawing, and Integration of form and content.
C. Construct and prepare appropriate supports and surfaces for mixed media drawing.
D. Evaluate and critique class projects using relevant terminology in oral or written formats.
E. Examine and describe historical and contemporary developments, trends, materials, and
approaches in drawing.
F. Translate images and conceptual ideas into drawings.
G. Employ compositional techniques using balance of value systems, a variety of shapes, a variety
of sizes, and traditional concepts such as asymmetry and symmetry.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Exploration of formal skills, conceptual approaches and the application of
formal elements as applied to image making in a wide range of media,
formats, and surfaces
2. Design, process, and production of drawings in multiple mediums and
formats
3. Perceptual and conceptual approaches to image making
4. Integration of form and content
5. Development and expression of ideas and concepts through visual means
6. Traditional and contemporary approaches to the construction and
presentation of drawings
7. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects using relevant terminology

Hours
4.50

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

7. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects using relevant terminology
in oral or written formats
8. Historical and contemporary developments, trends, materials and approaches
in drawing
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. The design and production of drawings in multiple media and formats
2. Traditional and contemporary methods of creating space, form, and
composition
3. Development and expression of ideas and concepts through visual means
4. Production of drawings that creatively interpret and apply formal and
conceptual skill to the development of personal images
5. Experimentation with combinations of wet and dry media
Total Hours

Hours
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
16.50
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Individual instructor-student critiques
H. Class critiques
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Demonstration
F. Homework
G. Class participation
H. Mid-term and final examinations
I. Accumulative Portfolio
J. Class and individual critique participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout with images of the step by step abstraction series by Picasso and
Matisse. Be prepared to discuss in class how the elements and principles of design are
addressed in this type of work.
2. Read a handout about abstract drawing. Be prepared to discuss in class how the elements
and principles of design are addressed in this type of work.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a myth (i.E. Sphinx, Atlantis, Quetzalcoatl, mermaids, etc.) Write a one to two

1. Research a myth (i.E. Sphinx, Atlantis, Quetzalcoatl, mermaids, etc.) Write a one to two
page report describing the myth. Bring to class for discussion. The report and preliminary
drawings leading to a final project will go into your sketchbook.
2. Write a one page report on the tool drawings of Jim Dine. Describe the drawings and the
media used by Dine. Also address the significance of his particular subject matter and
your opinion of his work. Bring to class for discussion.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare a graphite pencil rendering of six or more clear glass containers half filled with
water. Arrange in a composition and set a light source from the right side of the
composition size 11 x 14 on two ply bristol paper.
2. Prepare a drawing that metamorphosis of an object to another dissimilar objectsize 18 x
24. Your choice of drawing media (blk and white or color).
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Wood, Dan. Craft of Drawing: A Handbook of Materials and Techniques . Harcourt College
Pub, 1988.
B. Nachmanovitch, Stephen. Free Play: Improvisation in Life and Art. Tarcher, 1991.
C. Rawson, Phillip. Art of Drawing: An Instructional Guide. Prentice Hall, 1987.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Drawing Materials such as pencils, crayons, chalk, and support materials.

Created/Revised by: Simone Senat
Date: 12/03/2012

