BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 1 - Art Appreciation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides a general introduction to art that offers a look at works of art through the study of
theory, terminology, themes, design principles, media, techniques, with an introduction to the visual
arts across time and diverse cultures. (C-ID ARTH 100).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate and critique works of art and architecture based on formal elements and principles of
design and employing appropriate art historical terminology
B. Analyze, evaluate, and distinguish materials and techniques used for creating art and
architecture
C. Differentiate art historical methodologies
D. Identify, analyze, and discuss the functions of art and architecture and the roles of artists in
diverse cultures
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Defining Art: Functions
2. Visual Elements of Art
3. Principles of Design
4. Media and Techniques
5. Methodologies of Art History and Art Criticism
6. Overview of art history from a global perspective
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
10.00
6.00
5.00
20.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Short papers

D. Short papers
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in "Art Past, Art Present" on Prehistoric Art, and come to class prepared
to discuss the various theories about the possible functions of Upper-Paleolithic figurines
and cave paintings.
2. Read the section in "Art Past, Art Present" on Greek "lost-wax" Bronze Casting
technique, and come to class prepared to discuss the technical steps required to complete a
sculpture in this medium.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research the Greek Parthenon and the Roman Pantheon. Write an essay comparing and
contrasting these two works of ancient monumental architecture.
2. Research the Cubist movement, and the influences it had ion subsequent 20th Century art.
Write an essay in which you assess the Cubist movement from your own perspective, and
speculate as to why its influence was so pervasive.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Explore the websites: Google Art Project, or Web Gallery of Art. Find an artwork of
interest to you. Write a short paper in which you describe, interpret, and evaluate the
selected artwork.
2. Visit several local art galleries. From these exhibitions, pick two paintings or sculptures to
compare, and write a qualitative analysis of their form and content.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Frank P. L., and Preble, S. . Artforms. 10th Edition. New York: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2010.
B. Wilkins. D., Schultz, B., and Linduff, K. M.. Art Past, Art Present. 6th Edition. Pearson, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts.
B. Video/DVD presentation: various
C. Hands-on materials that might include, drawing paper, paint, collage material and found objects.

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 03/04/2013

