BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 2 - Art History Survey I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: English Level IV Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides an overview of western art and architecture from prehistory through the medieval
period within their historical and cultural contexts. (C-ID ARTH 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify, examine, and assess representative works of art and architecture from prehistory
through the medieval period employing appropriate art historical terminology.
B. Analyze, discuss, and differentiate works of art and architecture in terms of historical context
and cultural values.
C. Analyze, discuss, and differentiate the roles of art, architecture, and the artist from prehistory
through the medieval period.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the discipline of Art History: terms, concepts, methodology
2. Prehistoric and other Small-scale societies
3. Ancient Near East: Mesopotamia
4. Egyptian
5. Aegean and Greek
6. Etruscan and Roman
7. Early Christian and Byzantine
8. Early Medieval, including Carolingian and Ottonian
9. Romanesque
10. Gothic
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
8.00
5.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Written Assignments
C. Written Examinations
D. Mid-term and final examinations
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Chapter 1 in Jansen's History of Art, on Prehistoric Art, and come to class prepared
to discuss the various theories about the possible functions of Upper-Paleolithic art.
2. Access Oxford Art Online, through the Library website, and research the Akkadian
"Victory Stele of Naram-Sin". Be prepared to discuss or write on the parallels between
this sculpture and the Egyptian "Palette of King Narmer".
B. Writing Assignments
1. Art in Small-scale Societies:
In this paper, to be written in essay format, you will describe the commonalities and
contrasts between the artworks of Upper-Paleolithic hunter-gatherers and Indigenous
Australian Aborigines.
What can be learned from the physical evidence and the use of "cultural analogy" about
the importance of art to everyday life for people living in small-scale societies?
2. Spirit in the Stone: Using examples of art and architecture from Ancient Greece, Rome,
and Medieval European Roman Catholicism (Romanesque and Gothic styles), examine
the religious uses of material objects and constructed environments. Why did people seem
to need tangible concrete objects and structured environments to effectively practice their
various spiritual faiths?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View a selection of 6 Roman portrait busts in class, and attempt to infer characteristics of
their personalities from the way the sculptors represented them. Then, research these
individuals, and write a paper comparing their actual personalities to your initial
impressions. How close did the sculptors come to conveying the actual personality of each
person?
2. Explore the websites: Google Art Project, or Web Gallery of Art. Find an artwork of
interest to you. Write a short paper in which you describe, interpret, and evaluate the
selected artwork.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Davies, P., Denny, W., Hofrichter, F., Janson, A., et al. Janson's History of Art: The Western
Tradition (8th Edition). 8th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Library resources, such as Oxford Art Online
B. Websites

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 10/29/2012

