BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 3 - Asian Art History Survey
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides a select overview of art and architecture from India, Southeast Asia, China,
Korea, and Japan from pre-history to modern times. (C-ID ARTH 130).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify, examine, and assess representative works of art and architecture from the art historical
periods covered in this course employing appropriate art historical terminology.
B. Analyze, discuss, and differentiate works of art and architecture in terms of historical context
and cultural values.
C. Analyze, discuss, and distinguish the roles of art, architecture, and the artist from the art
historical periods covered in this course.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Discipline of Art History and Connoisseurship

Hours
3.00

The following units are concerned with the reading and interpretation of the
visual language of art and architecture in each region, and the understanding
of the religious, social, political meaning and functions of these works.
2. India

12.00

Indus valley, Shaishunaga-Nanda, Maurya, Shunga, Andhra, Kushan, Gupta,
Medieval, Sultanate, Vijayanagar, Madura periods and the Mughal dynasty,
20th century.
3. South East Asia

6.00

Pre-Angkor, Fa Nan, Chen La, Koulen, Angkor, Thai periods Ban Chieng,
Dvaravati, Sukhothai, Ayudhya periods
4. Indonesia

3.00

Period of Chinese influence, Shirvijaya and Shailendra Kingdoms, East
Javanese period, Majapahit, Wayang, and Islamic styles.
5. China
Pre-Shang, Shang, Anyang, Zhou, Qui, Han, Age of Disunion, Sui, Tang,
Five Dynasties, Sung, Yuan, Ming, Qing Periods, and 20th century
6. Korea

12.00

3.00

6. Korea

3.00

Naknang, Three Kingdoms, Unifed Silla, Koryo, Choson, and YI periods,
20th century.
7. Japan

12.00

Naknang, Three Kingdoms, Asuka, Nara, Jogan, Heian, Fujiwara,
Kamakura, Nambokocho, Muromachi, Momoyama, and Edo Periods, late
19th and 20th centuries.
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Class participation
C. Short papers
D. Essays and research papers
E. Essay Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout on Buddhism and prepare to discuss in class how the visual language
and context of the chaitya hall and its evolution.
2. Read the chapter on Literature, Calligraphy, and Painting, in the text and prepare to
discuss the visual language and context of the hand scroll, The Tale of Genji, from the
Heian Period.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a comparison of the Chinese Mawangdui Funerary Banner of Xin Zhui and the 10th
century of the Tibetan Thangka of Hayagriva.
2. Write an essay explaining the visual language, meaning and function of the Great Stupa at
Sanchi, Madhya Pradesh, India.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the development of Chinese paper and be prepared to discuss the steps of
production and materials involved in the process.
2. Research the development of Buddhist imagery during the Kushan Dynasty and be
prepared to discuss how images of the Buddha appear in Gandhara.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. O’Riley, M. K.. Art Beyond the West. 2nd Edition. Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 2006.
B. Kleiner, Fred S.. Gardner's Art through the Ages: Non-Western Perspectives. 13th Edition.
Wadsworth Publishing, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts

A. Handouts
B. Hands-on materials

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 12/03/2012

