BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 35 - Illustration Art I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: ART 31
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the study and practice of illustration art. Students will investigate
both contemporary and historical illustration art. Various media and techniques used in illustration art
will be explored. Students will gain an understanding of how illustration is used in client projects, and
how to market their skills to clients in the print and online design industries.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the characteristics and uses of art materials and digital media commonly used for
creating contemporary illustration projects.
B. Identify the basic terminology of illustration art.
C. Describe the various functions and purposes of illustration art.
D. Analyze techniques and styles of contemporary illustrators.
E. Discuss the function and use of illustration and fine art in print and online design.
F. Identify employment opportunities and skills required in the illustration field.
G. Compare and contrast the differences between historical and contemporary illustration
techniques.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Traditional Illustration Techniques
2. Digital Illustration Techniques
3. Illustration use and abuse in the print design industry
4. Media overview: introduction to various media, and experimentation
with tools and trick of the trade
5. Editorial Illustration
6. Advertising Illustration
7. Analysis of historical and contemporary illustration
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
1.00
1.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Editorial Illustration for print and online projects
2. Advertising Illustration techniques and implementation
3. Illustration applications for small and medium-size business and in-house

Hours
13.00
12.00
12.00

3. Illustration applications for small and medium-size business and in-house
design groups
4. Traditional and digital Illustration Techniques
5. Developing and creating illustration projects for real-world client projects
Total Hours

12.00
6.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Written assignments
D. Critique and evaluation of projects
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research an illustrator from the Alternative Pick website, read the illustrator's biography.
Share their specific techniques, educational background and client's work with the class.
2. Read handout related to illustration techniques, research an alternative technique and
discuss this technique with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research an illustrator from the list supplied by instructor. Write a list of twenty words
that decribe the techniques of the illustrator, such as "bold, stylized, colorful, cluttered".
Design a poster representing the illustrator's style and incorporate your twenty words into
the design.
2. Research an illustrator online and write a one-page critique on the illustrator and the
individual's style of illustration.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Photograph (or find online) five advertising promotional projects that incorporate
illustration. Incorporate photographs in an Adobe Illustrator file for viewing and critique.
2. Research an illustrator in the style you would most like to become proficient at in the
future. Share with class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Markers and Pencils
B. Tutorials
C. Paper Stock
D. Scanners
E. Printers

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly
Date: 02/04/2013

