BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 63 - Intermediate Sculpture, Clay
Prerequisite(s): ART 60
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course focuses on the production of sculpture through the combination of clay with wood, metal,
"found" objects, and other materials. The aesthetic and technical aspects of construction and
combination of materials will be emphasized, as well as hand-building, clay making and firing
techniques, welding, and kiln building. Contemporary artists will be discussed and emphasis placed on
art created in a Postmodern world, and especially how clay, combined with other media fit into that
world.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. recognize the art works of three-dimensional contemporary artists.
B. formulate ideas, solve their translation into visual language, and construct the finished work.
C. create a personal visual language and assess how it relates to the Postmodern art context.
D. demonstrate increasing competence in working with three-dimensional media, construction
techniques, and kiln building.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the parameters of the course and facility; classroom, shop,
and equipment safety rules.
2. Review of three-dimensional methods and processes as they apply to clay in
particular and other media in general.
3. Postmodern art with an emphasis on three-dimensional work in particular.
4. Construction techniques to combine mixed media, kiln building, welding,
clay making and firing techniques, and other processes.
5. Five art projects based on conceptual ideas and use of metaphor,
increasingly more challenging in technique and concept.
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
13.50
5.00
5.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Introduction to the parameters of the course and facility; classroom, shop,
and equipment safety rules.
2. Review of three-dimensional methods and processes as they apply to clay in
particular and other media in general.
3. Construction techniques to combine mixed media, kiln building, welding,

Hours
1.00
10.50
35.00

3. Construction techniques to combine mixed media, kiln building, welding,
clay making and firing techniques, and other processes.
4. Five projects based on conceptual ideas and use of metaphor increasingly
more challenging in technique and concept.
Total Hours

35.00
30.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Projects
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read introduction in Postmodern Ceramics on reserve in the ARC and write a summary
for class discussion.
2. Read Chapter 4 in Contemporary Sculpture and choose and artist and their work for class
discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay on a three-dimensional work of art on display in the Butte College Art
Gallery. Discuss the artist's work in terms of use of visual language and material in
communication of concept.
2. Write an essay on an assigned artist. Address how that artist chooses, combines, and
manipulates materials to express the content of the work.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research local private galleries to determine how your artwork might be received by those
venues, and design a letter of introduction for that venue.
2. Prepare an Artist Statement, resume, letter of introduction and digitize five images of your
artwork.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Students will purchase some of their own clay, wood, metal, and other materials and tools.
B. Books, DVD's and videos available in the ARTS Resource Center.

Created/Revised by: Alexandra O'Neil
Date: 12/03/2012

