BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 4H - Honors Art History Survey II
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2 or concurrent enrollment and Admission to the Honors
Program
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This is an Honors level survey of the major visual arts of the Renaissance and the Modern World.
Through a process of thorough analysis, critical thinking, extended discussions, and original oral and
written responses, students will examine the arts of painting, sculpture, and architecture within their
historical and cultural contexts. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze, compare, and synthesize significant global ideas and primary original works of art and
architecture from many different cultures and time periods, realizing both their distinctiveness
and commonalities.
B. Demonstrate, in seminar-type discussions, critical thinking skills in the examination of the art
and cultures studied, analyzing works within their original social and physical contexts.
C. Analyze and interpret art based on “reading” its visual language (iconography) and on research
into the context within which it was originally created.
D. Demonstrate the ability to form and support an argument relative to function(s) and meaning(s)
of a researched artwork.
E. Demonstrate advanced writing skills and creative critical thinking in composing a minimum of
5000 words in analytical essays and creative papers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the discipline of Art History and Connoisseurship.
a. Specialized vocabulary
b. Methods of responding to a work of art: describing, interpreting,
evaluating.
c. Qualitative analysis
2. Historical Context: Art before 1300 CE.
a. Greek and Roman Art
b. Medieval European Art
3. Renaissance in Italy
a. Proto- and Early Renaissance
b. High Renaissance
4. Renaissance in Northern Europe
a. Flanders
b. Holland
c. Germany
5. Baroque Art in Italy and Northern Europe

Hours
6.00

5.00

10.00

5.00

5.00

5. Baroque Art in Italy and Northern Europe
a. Catholic Countries
b. Protestant Counties
6. Late 18th, early 19th Century Art
a. Rococo
b. Neo-Classicism
7.
Modernism and Post-Modernism
a. 19th Century
1. Realism
2. Impressionism
3. Post-Impressionism
b. 20th Century
1. Fauvism
2. Cubism and related developments
3. Dada and Surrealism
4. Abstract Expressionism
5. Pop
6. Realism
7. Environmental
c. 21st Century contemporary
Total Hours

5.00

5.00

15.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Field Trips
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Discussion
I. Demonstrations
J. Reading Assignments
K. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Short papers
H. Essays and research papers
I. Class Discussion
J. Written essays and/or research projects
K. Essay Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS

A. Reading Assignments
1. Students will complete assigned reading in Janson's History of Art, and perform research
into specific works of art and architecture in Oxford Art Online (available through the
Butte College Library). They will also research specific themes and iconographies in
Dictionary of Subjects and Symbol in Art, by James Hall.
B. Writing Assignments
1. example Honors 4H Essay Assignment: Artistic Merit
1. Chose, modify, and defend one or the other of the following propositions:
"Artists working on commission for the church and other powerful patrons during the
Renaissance and Baroque periods, their creativity stimulated by shared cultural beliefs and
financial support, produced artworks of greater artistic merit than modern artists working
for themselves during the 19th and 20th centuries."
or
"Artists working independently during the 19th and 20th centuries, their creativity
unfettered by tradition, or the dictates of powerful patrons, produced artworks of greater
artistic merit than their Renaissance and Baroque predecessors".
2. Use what you regard as the strongest example artworks from each of these periods to
support your position.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the Christian stories of the Annunciation and the Crucifixion in Dictionary of
Subjects and Symbols in Art.
2. Write a response paper comparing two images of the Crucifixion, one by Matthias
Grunewald, the other by Raphael Sanzio. Why are their two interpretations so different?
Which do you think is more effective in conveying the subject and meaning? Explain your
reasoning.
3. Read Chapter 7: Renaissance, in A Concise History of Art.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hall, James. . Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Art. 2nd Edition. Westview Press, 2007.
B. Davies, P & Denny, W. Janson's History of Art: The Western Tradition, Vol I. 8th Edition.
Pearson, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Oxford Art Online: a vast authoritative virtual text resource made available through the Butte
College Library.

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 12/06/2010

