BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 5 - Survey of Modern Art
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: ENGL 2 Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides an overview of art and architecture from the Western modern period of the 19th
and 20th centuries. (C-ID ARTH 150).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify, examine, and assess representative works of art and architecture from the art historical
periods covered in this course employing appropriate art historical terminology
B. Analyze, discuss, and differentiate works of art and architecture in terms of historical context
and cultural values
C. Analyze, discuss, and distinguish the roles of art, architecture, and the artist from the art
historical periods covered in this course
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Classicism and Romanticism
2. Realism, Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, Symbolism
3. Art Nouveau, Fauvism, Cubism, Non-Objectivity
4. Expressionism, Dada, Surrealism
5. American Modernism, including WPA and Abstract Expressionism
6. Minimalism, Pop Art
7. Conceptual Art, Happenings, Earthworks, Installation, Site-specific art
8. Post-Modernism, Neo-Expressionism
9. Globalization
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
5.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects

C. Written Examinations
D. Mid-term and final examinations
E. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about Dada and Surrealism in your text. Come to class prepared to discuss and
inquire about the relationship between these two art movements and the historical events
and cultural context between the two World Wars.
2. Read about Classicism and Romanticism in your text. Come to class prepared to discuss
and inquire about the changing role of the artist in the context of the late 18th and early
19th centuries.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Assess the quality and importance of the work of Pablo Picasso in a 1000 word essay.
Analyze why his work developed as it did, and describe his impact on other modern
artists of the 20th century.
2. Using as examples the paintings of 20th century Realists Georgia O'Keeffe, Edward
Hopper, Andrew Wyeth, and Kehinde Wiley, write a 1000 word essay answering the
question: "Why continue to paint realistically in the age of photography?"
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Search your community, or one nearby, for three works of architecture that seem
particularly well-suited to their site and their purposes. Write a critique of these buildings,
in which you trace the historical precedents of the visual vocabulary used, cite any original
elements of form and detail, and evaluate the value of the structures in contributing to the
downtown city-scape.
2. Search your community, or one nearby, for public art. Photograph or sketch the works,
taking notes on their locations and observable public reaction to them. Write an
assessment of the value of this public art for the community. Come to class prepared to
discuss your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Kleiner, Fred S.. Gardner’s Art Through the Ages: The Western Perspective: Backpack –
Modern Europe and America. 14th Edition. Wadsworth Publishing, 2013.
B. Arnason, H.H. and Mansfield, E.. History of Modern Art. 7th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2012.

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 03/04/2013

