BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 4 - Art History Survey II
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides an overview of art and architecture from the Renaissance to the Contemporary
period within their historical and cultural contexts. (C-ID ARTH 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify, examine, and assess representative works of art and architecture from the Renaissance
to the contemporary period employing appropriate art historical terminology.
B. Analyze, discuss, and differentiate works of art and architecture in terms of historical context
and cultural values.
C. Analyze, discuss, and distinguish the roles of art, architecture, and the artist from the
Renaissance to the Contemporary period.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the discipline of Art History and Connoisseurship
2. Historical Context: Art before 1300
3. Italian Renaissance and Mannerism
4. 15th-Century Flemish
5. Northern Renaissance
6. Baroque and Rococo
7. Neoclassicism, Romanticism, and Realism
8. Impressionism and Post-Impressionism
9. Major movements of the 20th and 21st centuries
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
10.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
6.00
5.00
10.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Written Assignments
C. Written Examinations
D. Mid-term and final examinations
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Chapter 13 in Jansen's History of Art, on 14th Century Italian art, and come to class
prepared to discuss the representational innovations of the artists Giotto di Bondone, and
Duccio di Buoninsegna.
2. Read the introduction to Chapter 27 in Jansen's History of Art, on Modern Art, and come
to class prepared to discuss aspects of the social context that influenced artists such as
Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, and Vasily Kandinsky to push abstraction further than their
19th century predecessors.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After becoming familiar with the Old Testament story of "Abraham's Sacrifice of Isaac",
describe, compare, and evaluate two interpretations in bronze of this story by Filippo
Brunelleschi and Lorenzo Ghiberti. Which artist deserved to win the prestigious
commission for the "Doors of the Florence Baptistery", and why?
2. Compare and contrast the paintings on the subject of "Judith Slaying Holofernes" done by
Artemisia Gentileschi and by Michelangelo Merisi (Caravaggio). Write an essay in which
you cover the following questions:
1. Which artists' interpretation do you think is most successful in conveying the story?
Why?
2. In what ways do the artists use the depiction of this story as a vehicle for
self-expression and self-promotion?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Listen to the Charlie Rose interview with V.S. Ramachandran
(http://www.charlierose.com/). Come to class prepared to discuss this question: How do
Dr. Ramachandran's ideas about the unique properties of the human brain help explain
the power of visual imagery to influence and move us emotionally and intellectually?"
2. Explore the websites: Google Art Project, or Web Gallery of Art. Find an artwork of
interest to you. Write a short paper in which you describe, interpret, and evaluate the
selected artwork.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Davies, P., Denny, W., Hofrichter, F., Janson, A., et al. Janson's History of Art: The Western
Tradition (8th Edition). 8th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Hands-on materials

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 10/29/2012

