BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 14 - Basic Figure Drawing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: ART 8
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to drawing the human figure from observation using a wide variety of
drawing media and techniques. Topics include an introduction to human anatomy and the historical
and contemporary roles of figure drawing in the visual arts. Students in this course will learn both
descriptive and interpretive approaches to drawing the figure. (C-ID ARTS 200).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Create observational drawings from the live figure model in a wide range of drawing media.
B. Develop expressive content through manipulation of line, form, value, composition posture, and
anatomical proportions.
C. Evaluate and critique class projects using relevant terminology in oral or written formats.
D. Examine and describe the major historical, contemporary, and critical trends in figure drawing.
E. Demonstrate the successful development and application of proportion, sighting, measurement,
and foreshortening.
F. Demonstrate Gesture drawing and massing of form using line and value.
G. Apply volume and form to the human figure using structural and planar anylsis.
H. Develop compositional stategies using the human figure.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lecture
Topics
1. Anatomy and structure of the human body
2. Proportion, measurement, sighting, and foreshortening
3. Gesture drawing and massing of form
4. Use of line and value in describing the human figure
5. Application of the concepts of volume and space to drawing the human
figure
6. Structural and planar analysis of the figure
7. Development of composition using the human figure
8. Expressive content developed through manipulation of line, form, value,
composition, pose, and anatomical proportions
9. Introduction to and use of a variety of drawing materials and techniques
appropriate for drawing the human figure
10. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects using relevant terminology

Hours
8.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
1.00
2.00
1.00

10. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects using relevant terminology
in oral or written formats
11. Study and analysis of the major historical, contemporary, and critical trends
in figure drawing
Total Hours

1.00
4.50
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. The use of various drawing media, which may include charcoal, graphite,
Conte Crayon, and ink to represent the human form
2. Observational drawings from anatomical models employing a foundational
principles and practices of sighting and measurement, proportional studies,
contour and gesture, descriptive value, and development of volume
3. Critique and evaluation of drawing assignments and exercises
4. Expressive drawings from the live model
Total Hours

Hours
25.00
25.00

15.00
11.50
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Group and individual critiques in oral or written formats
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Demonstration
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Written or Oral Examinations
H. Portfolio of completed work
I. Group and individual critiques in oral or written formats
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Using the internet, research drawing the proportions of the human figure. Read and print
2 short articles (1 to 2 pages) discussing this topic. Bring these to class to discuss and
share in small groups.
2. Read the chapter about muscles in the class text (Anatomy For The Artist by Sara
Simblet.) In your sketchbook note pertinent muscles that make up the upper leg. Bring to
class and be prepared to discuss.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read pages 32 and 33, 10-23 in class textbook (Anatomy For The Artist by Sara Simblet.)
Answer the questions on the question sheets given out in class. Bring the question sheets

to class for discussion.
2. Pick a Contemporary figure artist and write a short 2 page description of the artist and his
/her work. Bring to class and make a short presentation. Include some examples of the
artists work.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a gesture drawing from the model using short action poses (30 seconds to 1 1/2
min.) Use a variety of media including compressed charcoal, pencil, felt-tip pens and vine
charcoal.
2. Work on 2 full figure drawings. One male and one female. Use conte crayon on 1 drawing
and compressed charcoalon the other. Approximate size 18" x 24".
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Simblet, Sarah. Anatomy For The Artist . 1st Edition. DK, 2001.
B. Szunhyoghy, A. Drawing the Human Figure: The Artist's Complete Guide. 2015 Edition. H. F.
Ullmann Publishing, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Various drawing materials such as pencils, chalk, ink, charcoal, paper, etc.

Created/Revised by: Simone Senat
Date: 12/03/2012

