BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 23 - Introduction to Printmaking
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: ART 8
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the basic materials, equipment, and processes of printmaking,
including relief (linocut and woodcut), intaglio (drypoint, etching, and collagraph), planography
(lithography and monotype), and stencil (screenprint).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Create a portfolio of work demonstrating formal, conceptual, and material development in a
broad range of printmaking techniques.
B. Evaluate and critique class projects using correct terminology in oral or written formats.
C. Examine and describe historical and contemporary developments, trends, materials, and
approaches in printmaking.
D. Safely handle and maintain the print lab equipment.
E. Translate ideas and visual experience into images using both formal and conceptual approaches.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction and History overview of printmaking
2. Materials, methods and techniques in the translation of ideas and the
development of designs and imagery
3. Safe handling of materials and equipment
4. Contemporary trends and developments in materials, techniques and
approaches to printmaking
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
15.00
4.00
5.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Developmenet of drawings and design suitable for each print technique
2. Preparation of equipment and materials for each print technique and
execution of ideas/printing
3. Group and individual critiques on in-progress and finished print works
4. Maintain equipment and supplies
Total Hours

Hours
11.00
30.00
6.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Field Trips
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Lecture and critique
D. Demonstrations
E. References to textbooks, books on specific artists and techniques
F. Original examples of processes discussed
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Participation
B. Progress of student's work
C. Quality of student's work
D. Improvement
E. Sketchbook / Journal
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout on the History of Printmaking in preparation for class discussion.
2. Research and present a specific printmaking technique to the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select three student projects and critique them in writing. Be prepared to present your
critiques to the class.
2. Write and essay on an assigned printmaker.Explain the techniques and materials of the
artist and discuss the meaning of his/her images in your essay.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a museum or local gallery once a semester to view an art show and write a critique of
the exhibition.
2. Research the Japanese relief printing process and select a Japanese woodblock print to
discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Books, DVD's, and videos available in the ARTS Resource Center.
B. Plates for surface work: wood, copper plates, collagraph plates, Plexiglas, cutters, brayer,
sketchbook, Utility knife, xacto knife, printing paper, apron and gloves and drawing material.

Created/Revised by: Alexandra O'Neil
Date: 12/03/2012

