BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 9 - 3-D Foundation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the concepts, applications, and historical references related to
three-dimensional design and spatial composition, including the study of the elements and organizing
principles of design as they apply to three-dimensional space and form. Development of a visual
vocabulary for creative expression through lecture presentations and use of appropriate materials for
non-representational three-dimensional studio projects. (C-ID ARTS 101).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and understand the formal elements and organizing principles of three-dimensional art.
B. Independently produce objects, forms, and problem-solving projects that successfully
incorporate the basic elements and organizing principles of three-dimensional art.
C. Discuss, describe, analyze and critique three-dimensional works of art through references to the
formal elements and principles of design.
D. Make individual aesthetic decisions and judgments related to their own design work.
E. Translate ideas and visual experience into tactile forms objects using both formal and
conceptual approaches.
F. Recognize the presence of specific design elements and principles in works of art as well as in
the everyday physical world around them, throughout history and across cultures.
G. Compose in three dimensions and work with a variety of media which may include but is not
limited to clay, wood, metal, paint, plaster, paper, fibers, mixed media, and in the use of digital
technology such as 3D scanners and printers in an appropriate and safe manner.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fundamental theoretical concepts and terminology common to all
three-dimensional art and design activities, including the elements of design
which may include line, shape, form, space, value, texture, and color
2. Organizing principles of three-dimensional design, which may include
balance, proportion, repetition, variety, scale, and emphasis
3. Problem solving visual exercises that develop three-dimensional awareness
and require exploration and manipulation of the basic three-dimensional
elements
4. Dynamic relationships of three-dimensional elements and organizing
principles
5. Introduction to a variety of three-dimensional materials and techniques
6. Translation of ideas or visual experience into tactile forms using both
formal and conceptual approaches

Hours
2.50

2.50
2.50

2.50
2.50
2.50

7. Evaluation and critique of historical examples of three-dimensional design
from various cultures, historical periods, and aesthetic sensibilities
8. Written assignments and/or exams in which students must clearly articulate
comprehension of the basic elements and principles of three-dimensional
design
9. Critical evaluation (practical, written and/or oral) of three-dimensional
works through references to formal elements and principles of design
10. Contemporary trends, materials, and approaches in three-dimensional design
Total Hours

2.50
2.50

3.00
2.50
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Lab orientation
2. Problem solving visual exercises that develop three-dimensional awareness
and require exploration and manipulation of the basic three-demensional
materials
3. Studio projects that explore the elements and organizing principles of
three-dimensional design
4. Development of skills and processes using a variety of artistic materials,
techniques and tools appropriate to an introductory study in design, which
may include paper, wood, plaster, wire, metal, clay, fibers, mixed media etc.
5. Participation in group and individual critiques
Total Hours

Hours
2.50
20.00

22.00
20.00

12.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Field Trips
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Demonstrations
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Performance Examinations
G. Written or Oral Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read handout on the Elements of art and prepare to critique the way in which artists

employed these elements in their art works.
2. Read handout on the Principles of Design and prepare to critique the way in which artists
employed these design elements in their art works.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a three-dimensional artwork in the Butte College Art Gallery to write about and
sketch. Introduce the artwork including a sentence addressing the content of the artwork,
describe the artwork in detail, and use the description of the artwork as evidence for the
meaning.
2. Write an Artist Statement using the format given in class and be prepared to share and
critique your statement and those of fellow students.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a three-dimensional collage using objects in your kitchen by employing the
Elements and Principles of Design.
2. Research an assigned artist and describe in your sketchbook how the artists uses materials
and visual language.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Otto Ocvirk. Art Fundamentals. 10th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Paper, clay, wood, wire, glue, fiber, cardboard, found objects, carving tools, hot glue gun and
other tools and materials as needed based on projects.
B. Books films, and periodicals available in the ARTS Resource Center.

Created/Revised by: Alexandra O'Neil
Date: 12/03/2012

