BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 39 - Business of Graphic Design
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the business of graphic design and related fields, concentrating on
professional issues and relationships with clients, art directors, advertising agencies, printers,
representatives, and brokers.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify design principles necessary for a successful career in Graphic Design and related fields.
B. Analyze business procedures necessary for a successful career.
C. Demonstrate proficiency in the communication skills necessary to work effectively with a client,
art director, agency, printer, service bureau, representative, or broker.
D. Identify and describe the procedures necessary to run an efficient graphic design business
without sacrificing aesthetic concentration.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Designer for Hire - Professional Issues and Relationships
2. Legal Practices and Ethical Standards for Commissioned Artwork
3. Getting Into Business - Designing Your Own Survival Guide
4. Getting Work
5. Introduction to Design Principles
6. Pricing and Protecting Your Work
7. Sales Tax and Use Regulations
8. Effective Communication fo Business Success
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
3.00
12.00
6.00
3.00
9.00
3.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Trips
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Directed discussion
E. Visual Aids
F. Case Study Project
G. Handout Readings

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research three new local business start-ups from a local newspaper by reading through the
Doing Business As (DBA) filings. Share with the class.
2. Read handouts relating to business start ups supplied by the instructor. Write a one page
overview of the needs required to start up a business.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a list of the business procedures necessary for a business to have in place before
opening their doors or allowing access to their services.
2. Write a one-page brief on a selected DBA filing. Discuss the service they will be offering
with the class.
3. Write a list the items that each business should have in place before opening their doors or
allowing access to their services.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Develop a ficticious business statement for a business you would like to start. Share with
the class.
2. Visit a local business and interview the owner. Ask three questions and share the answers
with the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Reference Publications

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly
Date: 02/04/2013

