BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 81 - Introduction to Fiber Arts
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to basic materials, methods and vocabulary used in fiber and textile
media as well as the hands-on development of expressive visual ideas. Contemporary and historical
development and cultural relevance of the fiber media is also explored. (C-ID ARTS 282).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and work with a variety of fiber techniques which may include, but are not limited to:
felt making and papermaking, hand-spinning, warp and weft face weaving techniques, basketry
structures as well as a wide variety of non-loom techniques.
B. Create artwork using a variety of fiber materials derived from animal to plant sources to other
alternative materials such a metal wire.
C. Safely use a variety of tools related to fiber work.
D. Integrate formal elements and principles into the design and creation of original studio projects
using fibers.
E. Identify cultural traditions and historical varieties of fiber-oriented form, from architectural
spaces to smaller objects, both functional and non-functional.
F. Analyze and critique artwork in oral and written contexts using relevant critique formats,
concepts, and terminology.
G. Examine and describe contemporary trends, materials, and approaches in fiber arts.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation and fundamentals
2. Fiber materials and alternative materials that may be incorporated into fiber
arts
3. Design principals and elements
4. Cultural traditions and techniques
5. Contemporary trends, materials, and approaches to fiber arts
6. Analysis and criticism of fiber arts
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
5.50
3.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Orientation and fundamentals
2. Create original works in fibers based on the concepts, tools, materials and

Hours
3.00
25.00

2. Create original works in fibers based on the concepts, tools, materials and
processes presented in class
3. Pose, design and solve visual problems through the process of creating
works using fiber materials
4. Design personal fiber-oriented works with an understanding of the elements
and principles of visual language
Total Hours

25.00
20.00
28.50
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Demonstrations
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Portfolios
D. Papers
E. Oral Presentation
F. Projects
G. Homework
H. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout on the felting process in preparation for discussion.
2. Read handout on setting up a loom for weaving in preparation for class demonstration.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 5 page essay on the elements and principals of design that apply to a
three-dimensional art work on display in the Butte College Art Gallery.
2. Write a 1-2 page critique on an assigned fiber artist you have researched, and prepare to
discuss your findings in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Thoughtfully gather fiber material in your environment and prepare to explain how this
material will be incorporated into your fiber art piece.
2. Research Native American textile production and select a traditional form for class
presentation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Popovic, V., Ruck, O. The Textile Artist's Studio Handbook. 1st Edition. Quarry Books, 2012.
B. Held, S. Weaving: A Handbook of the Fiber Arts. 3rd Edition. Cengage Learning, 1998.

Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Students may use books, dvds, and videos available in the ARTS Resource Center.
B. Basic fiber materials will be provided, but students may wish to purchase additional fiber
materials.

Created/Revised by: Alexandra O'Neil
Date: 12/07/2015

