BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 18 - Intermediate Painting
Prerequisite(s): ART 17
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is a continuation of ART 17. Students continue practicing the techniques of painting,
focusing on exploring painting materials, perceptual skills and color theory, paint mixing and painting
techniques, as well as creative responses to materials and subject matter.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Prepare a variety of painting surfaces.
B. Demonstrate a personal sense of color and color theory within compositions.
C. Create successful compositions using a variety of canvas sizes and aspect ratios.
D. Describe art using appropriate terminology.
E. Examine and describe historical and contemporary developments, trends, materials, and
approaches in painting.
F. Assess and critique paintings in group, individual, and written contexts using relevant critique
formats, concepts and terminology.
G. Safely handle and use studio painting materials and equipment.
H. Create an artist statement.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Exploration of physical properties of painting materials beyond beginning
painting
2. Create paintings that describe a working knowledge of palette arrangement
and color mixing, including nuetrals
3. Compose compositions involving objective and non-objective subject
matters
4. Construct and prepare painting surfaces and supports using small and large
formats
5. Develop expressive content through the manipulation of paint and mixed
media
6. Examine and describe historical and contemporary developments, trends,
materials, and approaches in painting
7. Assess and critique paintings in group, individual, and written contexts
using relevant critique formats, concepts and terminology
8. Develop a personal style in painting
9. Develop a personal artist statement about current paintings

Hours
4.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
1.50

10. Safely handle and use studio painting materials and equipment
Total Hours

1.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Prepare a palette utilizing knowledge of warm and cool colors
2. Mix secondary, tertiary, and neutral colors from the primary warm and cool
palette
3. Construct and prepare painting surfaces, with attention to surface texture and
scale
4. Create a series of formal paintings based on developed personal style and
content
5. Assess and critique paintings in group, individual, and written contexts
using relevant critique formats, concepts and terminology
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
6.50
50.00
10.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Class critiques
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Demonstration
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Practical Evaluations
G. Formal Critiques
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about a master artist and a contemporary artist of your choice. Be prepared to come
to class to discuss them.
2. Choose and read an article from a recent issue from "Art in America". Take notes and be
prepared to share with the class the contents of the article.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Bring in two print-outs of master landscape paintings by artists such as Albert Bierstadt or
Vincent Van Gogh. Write a short essay explaining why you chose those landscapes and
compare and contrast what you see in the works.
2. Locate and read artist statements of at least three artists. Write your own short artist
statement.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit your favorite local outdoor location. Take photographs and create sketches of your

surroundings.
2. Visit a local art gallery or museum and describe two works from two separate artists. Use
vocabulary and terminology of the art elements and principles learned and used in class.
Make small sketches of these works to bring to class and discuss.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Brushes
B. Sponges, rags, paper towels
C. Paper
D. Stretch canvas
E. Paint
F. Palette

Created/Revised by: Simone Senat
Date: 12/03/2012

