BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 16 - Advanced Figure Drawing
Prerequisite(s): ART 15
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is a continuation of skills and drawing principals introduced in ART 14 and ART 15.
Traditional and contemporary methods and techniques of composition will be introduced. Emphasis
will be placed on the development of a personal style and the various uses of the human figure in
contemporary art.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Create expressive drawings using various drawing media and techniques.
B. Demonstrate the components of composition.
C. Describe contemporary trends in figure drawing in the arts.
D. Apply color and color theory to figure drawings.
E. Utilize the elements and principles of design in figurative compositions.
F. Compose mixed media collage to create figure studies and compositions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Gesture and Full Value Drawing Methods and Theories
2. Development of Personal Style
3. Personal Color Schemes
4. The elements and principals of design
5. Abstraction
Total Hours

Hours
5.50
3.00
3.00
10.00
4.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Gesture and Full Value Drawings Methods
2. Development of personal style
3. Personal color schemes
4. The elements and principals of design
5. Abstraction
6. Mixed media
Total Hours

Hours
23.50
8.00
8.00
25.00
5.00
7.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Individual instructor-student critiques during class sessions
H. Slides, Films, and Drawing examples
I. Class Critiques
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Demonstration
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Written or Oral Examinations
I. Accumulative portfolio
J. Sketchbook
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read "The Figure and the Environment" handout from the Goldstein Figurative book and
be prepared to discuss "composition," "visual weight," and "rhythm" in class.
2. Read the article "Composition and the Figurative Formalist". in your sketchbook. Write
your thoughts about the difference between a Figurative Formalist and other figurative
artists. Bring to class for discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research the "Steampunk" Art Movement and write a one page description of the
movement. Bring your written research paper and image examples to class for discussion.
A Steampunk Figurative drawing project will be developed from this discussion.
2. Research a figurative artist of your choice (historical or comtemporary) and write a one
page description of the artists life and work. In class you will give a verbal presentation of
the artist and your opinion of the artists work.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare a figurative collage composition which will include the following:
Two drawings from class sessions;
Two drawings from a second class session; Some photos; Some transfers. The collage
composition should be based on a figurative "Theme" (ie: social commentary, aesthetic
beauty, etc.)
2. Prepare two drawings on one sheet of brown paper (horizontal) with Litho Crayons. One
of the drawings should be in the style of Carl Gnass (see Handout).
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rubins, David, K. The Human Figure: An Antonomy of Artist. Penguin Books, 1975.
B. Nicolaides, Kimon. The Natural Way to Draw - A Working Plan of Art Study. Penguin Books,

2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Various drawing materials such as pencils, eraser, drawing pad, compressed charcoal, conte
crayon, charcoal pencils, pens, colored pencils, spray fixative, matboard, ink, portfolio, colored
paper, watercolor bruches, sketchbook, pastels, drawing board, etc.

Created/Revised by: Simone Senat
Date: 12/03/2012

