BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 17 - Beginning Painting
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to principles, elements, and practices of painting. Focus is on
exploration of painting materials, perceptual skills and color theory, paint mixing and technique, as
well as creative responses to materials and subject matter. (C-ID ARTS 210).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Create paintings that evince a working knowledge of the physical properties of painting
materials;
B. Organize and apply the basic formal elements and principles of design in paintings;
C. Apply the principles of perceptually and theoretically based color theory to painting projects;
D. Construct and prepare painting surfaces and supports;
E. Develop expressive content through manipulation of mark, color, value, and composition;
F. Assess and critique paintings in group, individual, and written contexts using relevant critique
formats, concepts and terminology;
G. Safely handle and use studio painting materials and equipment.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Exploration of physical properties of painting materials
2. Organization and application of the basic formal elements and principles of
design as they relate to painting
3. Observationally and theoretically based investigation of color theory, as it
relates to painting practice
4. Construction and preparation of painting surfaces and supports
5. Use and application of materials and tools of painting
6. Development of expressive content through manipulation of mark, color,
value, and composition
7. Historical and contemporary developments, critical trends, materials, and
approaches in painting, including representational, expressive, abstract, or
non-objective approaches
8. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects using relevant terminology
in oral or written formats
9. Studio, equipment, and material use and safety
Total Hours
Lab

Hours
1.00
3.00
2.50
2.00
3.00
3.00
4.00

4.00
3.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Exploration of physical properties of painting materials
2. Organization and application of the basic formal elements and principles of
design as they relate to painting
3. Safety rules and procedures related to the handling of painting materials
4. Evaluation and application of basic principles of color theory
5. Construction and preparation of painting surfaces and supports
6. Materials and tools of painting
Total Hours

Hours
20.00
15.00
6.50
15.00
10.00
10.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Field Trips
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Demonstrations
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Demonstration
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Written or Oral Examinations
G. Practical Evaluations
H. Formal critiques
I. Portfolio of completed work
J. Group and individual critiques in oral or written formats
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Choose one of the following movements: Impressionism, Expressionism, Minimalism,
Pop Art, Surrealism, Post-Impressionism, or Cubism. Find and read a current article about
this movement. Bring this article to class and share your findings with another student. Be
prepared for a class discussion.
2. Choose a painting from art history that you have been interested in or really appreciate.
Research it on the internet, and read at least two separate articles about this work. Take
notes and be prepared to discuss them in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Choose three famous paintings from art history. Compare and contrast the four C's
(Content, Color, Composition, Contrast) as they relate to one another.
2. Briefly describe your final painting in terms of the four C's (Content, Color, Composition,
Contrast.) How does your painting relate to the artist you chose to emulate?

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit your local book store and list the names of at least 6 different Art focused
magazines. Briefly describe your favorite of these magazines.
2. Visit a local gallery showing paintings. Choose one painting and describe it in relationship
to the four C's (Content, Color, Composition, Contrast). What style is it painted in? Who
is the artist? What is the title? When was it painted?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Robertson, Jean, McDaniel, Craig. Painting as a Language: Material, Technique, Form, Content.
1st Edition. Wadsworth Publishing, 2001.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Paper
B. Stretched canvas
C. Paint
D. Brushes
E. Palette
F. Sponges, rags, paper towels

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 12/03/2012

