BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 34 - Graphic Design II
Prerequisite(s): ART 31
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This is an intermediate course in graphic design. Students will apply design principles and tools of
graphic design learned in ART 31 and ART 32. Concentration is on increasing skill levels for
developing advanced design techniques for print and online.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply principles of graphic design for creating advanced design projects.
B. Demonstrate expanded technical proficiency and increased skills in the use of graphic design
applications.
C. Complete advanced design projects working within guidelines and design constraints set by
clients.
D. Identify contemporary job markets in graphic design industries, while developing
portfolio-related projects specific to obtaining employment in a design field.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Rapid visualization and ideation for project design
2. Increasing design skills through the use advanced techniques
3. Understanding and implementing advertising design techniques for
integrated print and online campaigns and projects
4. Utilizing social media, print design and current technology to increase
employment viability with self-promotion
5. Advanced computer skills, design skills and mastering software applications
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Developing thumbnails using rapid visualization and ideation techniques
2. Advanced design skills and techniques using specific design software used in
real-world applications and projects
3. Developing integrated online and print campaigns for advertising design
projects
4. Designing self promotional projects and portfolio-related projects using
advanced design techniques

Hours
10.00
10.00
11.00
10.00

5. Mastering software applications used in the design industries, and
developing advanced computer skills that can be implemented in real-world
situations for clients
Total Hours

10.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Trips
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Class projects
G. Critiques of class projects
H. Class discussion
I. Project assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
D. Exams
E. Essays
F. Participation in critiques
G. Critique and evaluation of creative projects
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article about a contemporary designer and give an oral report to the class. Discuss
a specific design technique the designer used in their work.
2. Read handout on current design techniques. Incorporate one technique in a visual layout
for class critique.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a one page article about a designer selected from the list provided by the instructor.
Incorporate content into a two page magazine layout.
2. Write a one page tutorial on a specific design technique. Share with the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research quotes from a specific designer. Design a poster based on the quote using Adobe
Illustrator and Photoshop.
2. Visit a local design firm, speak with an art director or designer from the firm and ask three
questions. Share the visit and answers with the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Recommended Reading
B. Internet research
C. Publications

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly
Date: 02/04/2013

