BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 2H - Honors Art History Survey I
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2 or concurrent enrollment and Admission to the Honors
Program
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This is an Honors level Survey of the major visual arts of the Ancient World through the Middle
Ages. Through a process of thorough analysis, critical thinking, extended discussions, and original
oral and written responses, students will examine the arts of painting, sculpture, and architecture
within their historical and cultural contexts. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze, compare, and synthesize significant global ideas and primary original works of art and
architecture from many different cultures and time periods, realizing both their distinctiveness
and commonalities.
B. Demonstrate, in seminar-type discussions, critical thinking skills in the examination of the art
and cultures studied, analyzing works within their original social and physical contexts.
C. Analyze and interpret art based on “reading” its visual language (iconography) and on research
into the context within which it was originally created.
D. Demonstrate the ability to form and support an argument relative to function(s) and meaning(s)
of a researched artwork.
E. Demonstrate advanced writing skills and creative critical thinking in composing a minimum of
5000 words in analytical essays and creative papers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Prehistoric Art and Art of Small-scale Societies
(a) Upper-Paleolithic
(b) Existing hunter-gatherers, and the use of cultural analogy
2. Art of the Ancient Near East
(a) Early civilizations of Mesopotamia
(b) General features of civilization
3. Egyptian Art
4. Aegean Art
5. Greek through Hellenistic Art
6. Etruscan Art
7. Roman Art
8. Early Christian
9. Byzantine
10. Early Medieval, including Carolingian and Ottonian
11. Romanesque

Hours
5.00

5.00

5.00
3.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
5.00

12. Gothic
Total Hours

5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Field Trips
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Discussion
I. Demonstrations
J. Reading Assignments
K. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Papers
C. Projects
D. Class participation
E. Short papers
F. Essays and research papers
G. Class Discussion
H. Essay Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Students will complete assigned reading in Janson's History of Art I, and perform research
into specific works of art and architecture in Oxford Art Online (available through the
Butte College Library). They will also research specific themes and iconographies in
Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Arts, by James Hall.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Honors 2 Essay #2: The Spirit in the Stone1. Why do people seem to need tangible
concrete objects and structured environments to effectively practice their various spiritual
faiths? 2. Using the examples of art and architecture from Greece and Rome, European
Roman Catholicism (Romanesque and Gothic styles), examine the uses of material
objects and constructed environments to convey spiritual meanings and messages, provide
focal points for devotion, provide environments for ritual and propitiation, reinforce
systems of belief, and control behavior.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the Greek gods Zeus (Jupiter), Athena (Minerva), and Poseidon (Neptune) in
Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Art.
2. Write a response paper comparing your initial impression of each of the 6 Roman portrait
busts we viewed in class, to the information about each person found at
www.roman-emperors.org. How well did the sculptors convey personality in these busts?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hall, James. Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Art. 2nd Edition. Westview Press, 2007.

B. Davies, P & Denny, W. Janson's History of Art: The Western Tradition, Vol. 1. 8th Edition.
Pearson, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Oxford Art Online: a vast authoritative virtual text resource made available through the Butte
College Library.

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 12/06/2010

