BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 56 - Advanced Ceramics
Prerequisite(s): ART 52
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an in-depth exploration of clay as a medium of expression, with emphasis on individual
ideas and directions. Students will concentrate on creating a personal vocabulary of imagery,
construction methods, and surface treatments, and will develop and draw upon a broad awareness of
historical as well as contemporary ceramic artworks.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe and explain the uses of various types of clays, glazes, firing techniques, and elements
of kiln design.
B. Design and create sophisticated clay forms using a variety of forming techniques, such as coil,
slab, wheel-throwing, extrusions, and combination methods.
C. Utilize glaze calculation and advanced techniques of application to successfully achieve finished
surfaces with desired colors, textures, and design elements.
D. Describe, explain, and utilize the influences of historical, as well as contemporary precedents, in
the creation of original sculpture and pottery.
E. Create a portfolio of finished work that and demonstrates technical proficiency, originality,
creative problem-solving, and personal self-expression.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction, Orientation
2. Historical and Contemporary Precedents in Ceramics
3. Advanced Hand-building Techniques
4. Advanced Wheel-throwing Techniques
5. Development of individual style and personal vocabulary of form and
content
6. Ceramic Figurative Sculpture
7. Ceramic Relief Sculpture
8. Glaze Testing
9. Special Firings
10. Portfolio Development: Photo-documentation of artwork for professional
quality presentation; development of resume, and curriculum vitae to secure
admission to 4-Year programs, scholarships, gallery representation, and/or
direct sales
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
4.50
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00

25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Visual problem solving exercises that develop ceramic work and require
self-exploration, as well as the manipulation of materials used to create
ceramic works.
2. Studio projects that explore advanced techniques and creatve processes of
creating ceramic artworks, including but not limited to, coil, soft slab, hard
slab, sgraffito, mishima, modeling, carving, wheel work, keeping a
sketchbook and journaling.
3. Development of advanced skills and processes using a variety of surface and
firing techniques appropriate to an advanced study in ceramics, which may
include but are not limited to slips, engobe, terra sigilata, glaze, burnishing,
in various firing atmospheres and temperatures.
4. Portfolio Development: Photo-documentation of artwork and developent of
curriculum vitae and resume for professional quality presentation to secure
admission to 4-Year programs, scholarships, gallery representation, and/or
direct sales.
5. Critical evaluation and critique of class projects.
Total Hours

Hours
6.50

36.00

20.00

4.00

10.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Prior to attending class during which we examine the development of individual
expression and personal voice, read "The Artist's Vision" in the textbook "Hands in Clay".
Come to class prepared to discuss "The Creative Process", "Social Concerns", and
"Personal Imagery".
2. Read the chapter on "Worldwide Interaction" in the textbook "Hands In Clay". Come to
class prepared to discuss 20th Century ceramic artists and their works.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Pick two ceramic artists whose work you find especially intriguing. Write a one to two

page paper describing, interpreting, and evaluating the artists' best works in comparison.
What are the elements of their personal style?
2. Keep a journal in which you sketch and write entries describing the evolution of form and
concept for
all assigned clay projects.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a local or regional art show or an exhibition at an art museum to get ideas for
sculptural forms. Take photographs (where permitted) or make sketches of forms you are
interested in for future reference.
2. Look for interesting architectural elements, that could be made out of ceramics, on older
buildings in one or more of our local communities. Photograph these and bring to class to
share and to generate ideas.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Peterson, Susan and Peterson, Jan.. Working with Clay. 3rd Edition. Laurence King, 2009.
B. Speight, Charlotte; Toki, John. Hands in Clay : An Introduction to Ceramics. 5th Edition.
McGraw-Hill Humanities/Social Sciences/Languages, 2003.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Students will purchase their own clay and tools.

Created/Revised by: David Cooper
Date: 12/03/2012

