BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 15 - Intermediate Figure Drawing
Prerequisite(s): ART 14
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is a continuation of Beginning Figure Drawing (ART 14). It will enhance students'
techniques, approaches and practices in drawing the human figure. students will further develop skills
and knowledge emphasis on composition and media development. Drawings will be done from live
nude models.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Illustrate positive/negative space relationships
B. Illustrate line and mass relationships
C. Create compositions using multiple figures.
D. Identify symmetry and asymmetry.
E. Demonstrate color perspective and color balance.
F. Describe a variety of historical and contemporary figurative artist and works.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Gesture Drawing
2. Contour Line Drawing
3. Value Scale and contrast
4. Composition, Balance, and Perspective
5. Colory Theory and Use of Color in Expression
Total Hours

Hours
1.50
2.00
4.00
9.00
9.00
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Create gesture drawings of the human figure from images and live models
2. Draw Contour Line drawings of the human figure from images and live
models
3. Create full value drawings of the human figure
4. Complete drawings of the human figure within compostions
5. Use color and color theory in human figure drawings
6. Apply emotive and expressive use of color in the figure
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
4.00
20.00
20.00
20.00
7.50
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Individual instructor-student critiques during class drawing sessions
H. Class critiques
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Written or Oral Examinations
E. Practical Evaluations
F. Accumulative portfolio
G. Class particpation and class critique participation
H. Stetchbook
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about figure and its environment in the Goldstein Figure book and answer the
following questions. Discuss how a figure and its environment should or should not relate
to each other in a good drawing composition.
2. Read about Edward Hopper's drawing in the Goldstein's figure book. Do you agree with
Goldstein's analysis of Edward Hopper's drawing? Discuss why or why not.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After viewing the movie "Egon Schiele", write a one to two page description of Schiele's
life and work and your opinion of his figurative work.
2. Research and write a one page description of the "Fauve" artist group. Include names of
artists, dates, and color innovations introduced by the group. Bring the report and and
visual examples (I.E. books, prints, etc.) of the groups work to class for discussion.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using the handout containing photos of models, prepare four gesture drawings of each
model.
2. Using the handout containing photos of models, prepare one erase technique drawing of
all or part of it. Drawing size 18" x 24" or larger.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Various drawing materials such as pencils, chalk, ink, charcoal, paper, etc.

Created/Revised by: Simone Senat
Date: 12/03/2012

