BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ART 22 - Screen Printing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course explores the materials and methods of water-based fine art screen-printing on paper. An
emphasis will be placed on the creative interpretation of various subject matter, concept and technical
skill. This course is designed for art majors and minors who wish to develop a personalized statement
in the graphic medium.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate a proper use of the tools, media, and processes used in water-based screen-printing
techniques.
B. Demonstrate a progressively developing technical expertise in the use of these media and
processes.
C. Identify the variety of uses of this medium by contemporary artists, illustrators, and clothing
designers.
D. Translate design and color through the creation of original compositions.
E. Demonstrate personal creativity, concept and critical awareness of aesthetics through the
production of original artwork and through participation in class critiques and discussions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation of studio practices and preparation of silk screen frames and
other equipment
2. Color mixing and blends
3. Paper stencil prints both cut paper and torn paper
4. Knife cut film stencils
5. Screen filler and Drawing Fluid Stencil prints
6. Photo stencils, transparency prep, and Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, Black
(CMYK) color separation
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Color mixing and blends
2. Paper stencil prints both cut paper and torn paper
3. Knife cut film stencils

Hours
4.00
5.00
6.00

4. Screen filler and Drawing Fluid Stencil prints
5. Photo stencils and transparency prep
6. CMYK color separation and experimentation prints of fabric
7. Presentation of work and critique
Total Hours

10.00
10.00
6.00
10.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Demonstrations
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Portfolios
D. Papers
E. Projects
F. Homework
G. Class participation
H. Written Assignments
I. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Introduction to History of Printmaking on reserve in the ARC and prepare to discuss
the development of various printmaking techniques.
2. Read the handout Preparing and Maintaining Screen Printing Materials and Techniques
and prepare for an in-class examination of this information.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay on an assigned printmaker. Discuss this artist's creative and technical
processes, and use of visual language.
2. Write an essay on a two-dimensional artwork on display in the Butte College Art Gallery.
Discuss the media and visual language of the work in terms of its meaning.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Based on in-class lecture/demonstration, collect photographs and various images that you
will use in the photographic transfer process for you next screen printing assignment.
2. Research a print from the Janet Turner Print Museum and discuss the artist's materials and
techniques.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Books, DVD's and videos available in the ARTS Resource Center.
B. Screens and squeegees, printing paper and ink, drawing materials, matte board, stencil materials,

etc.

Created/Revised by: Alexandra O'Neil
Date: 12/03/2012

