BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 23 - Automotive Heating and Air Conditioning Lab
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 22
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
120 hours Lab

2 Unit(s)

In this course students will develop and demonstrate the hands-on skills required to diagnose, adjust,
repair and maintain modern automotive Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) and
engine cooling systems. Students will use modern test equipment for diagnosis. Specific skills are
developed by the use of special tools used in servicing and repair of automotive HVAC and engine
cooling systems.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Diagnose and repair HVAC system.
B. Diagnose and repair complete refrigeration system component.
C. Diagnose and repair heating, ventilation, and engine cooling systems.
D. Diagnose and repair air conditioning operating systems and related controls.
E. Perform refrigerant recovery and recycling procedures.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Service and maintain AC service equipment
2. Perform multiple refrigerant leak detection methods
3. Practice refrigerant handling safety procedures
4. Perform ventilation system diagnostic operations
5. Perform AC service operations using recovery machines
6. Remove and replace operational components of the AC system
7. Perform service operations using engine coolant testers and flush machine
8. Pressure and performance tests on the refrigeration system
9. Perform electrical diagnosis on AC ventilation systems
10. Replace and repair electrical vacuum controls and systems
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Discussion
D. Problem-Solving Sessions

Hours
10.00
10.00
5.00
15.00
25.00
20.00
5.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
120.00

E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Demonstration
C. Group Participation
D. Class participation
E. Lab Projects
F. Final Examination
G. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the performance specifications on refrigeration systems and servicing and be
prepared to discuss in class.
2. Consult a repair publication before performing the evacuation and recharge procedure and
be ready to show the instructor where you found the correct repair information or
specifications.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Locate removal information of the evaporator assembly for the specific car you are
working on and record the removal procedures in your lab workbook.
2. Record proper procedures for engine cooling system diagnosis and be prepared to discuss
with your lab partner and instructor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Halderman, J. Automotive Engines and Air Conditioning. Pearson, 2014.

Created/Revised by: George Medina
Date: 11/16/2015

