BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 201 - Emissions and Transmissions Auto Skills Practice
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): Must be enrolled in a minimum of 2 units of AUT courses
(excluding AUT 1, AUT 41)
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: NT
25.5 - 51 hours Lab

0.5 - 1 Unit(s)

This course is a supervised lab experience designed to update and enhance technical skills in one or
more of the following areas: Electrical, Computer/Emission Controls, Drivability and
Transmissions/Drive Trains. Instruction will be a combination of laboratory demonstrations and skills
practice. Students may enroll in this course up to 1 unit(s) to complete the entire curriculum of the
course. Pass/No Pass Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate the basic overhauling procedures of automatic transmissions/transaxles.
B. Diagnose, test and repair automatic transmissions/transaxles.
C. Diagnose, test and repair manual transmission/transaxles problems.
D. Systematically diagnose and repair actual engine performance problems using
industry-approved electronic test equipment.
E. Perform circuit analysis, diagnostic testing, and repair of computer-controlled systems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Automatic transmission/transaxles overhaul procedures
2. Automatic transmission/transaxles repairing
3. Manual transmission/transaxles overhaul and repair
4. Auto electrical circuit analysis and diagnosis
5. Pollution control devices operation and repair (The Clean Air Car Program)
6. Computer controls
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Class Activities
B. Discussion
C. Demonstrations
D. Laboratory Experiments
E. Problem-Solving Exercises and Skills Practices
F. Selected reading from automotive repair manuals

Hours
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
25.5 - 51

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Lab Projects
B. Effective use of time as compared to the flat rate manual.
C. Number of successful completed jobs.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Using Mitchell's or Honda ISIS reference material, read the technical information and data
required for your assigned repair job. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Using ALLDATA reference material, read the technical information and data required for
your assigned repair job. Be prepared to share with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Generate a practice repair order for the transmission job assigned to the class. After the job
is completed write a detailed story of the job.
2. Fill out an electronic parts requisition including all proper vehicle information to enable
professional parts counter personnel to order proper parts for a specific job.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Instructor-developed materials, handouts and worksheets.
B. Manufacturer-developed materials, technical manuals.
C. Department vehicles.
D. Student owned vehicles.

Created/Revised by: George Medina
Date: 11/02/2015

