BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 200 - Chassis, Engines, Electrical, Auto Skills Practice
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): Must be enrolled in a minimum of 2 units of AUT courses
(excluding AUT 1, AUT 41)
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: NT
25.5 - 51 hours Lab

0.5 - 1 Unit(s)

This class is a supervised lab experience designed to update and enhance technical skills in the
following areas: Engines, Brakes/Chassis, Electrical, and Heating/Air Conditioning (AC) Systems.
Instruction will be a combination of laboratory demonstrations and skills practice. Students may enroll
in this course up to 1 unit(s) to complete the entire curriculum of the course. Pass/No Pass Only. Open
Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Diagnose and repair, to industry standards, the systems, subsystems and components in an
automobile in the areas of base brake and anti-lock brake systems.
B. Verify, diagnose and repair, to industry standards, the systems, subsystems and components in a
automobile in the area of suspension and chassis systems both base and electronically
controlled.
C. Perform general engine diagnosis.
D. Perform engine block assembly diagnosis and repair.
E. Perform AC system diagnosis and repair.
F. Perform a refrigeration system component diagnosis and repair.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Application of Ohm's law, verification, diagnosis and repair of lead acid
batteries and hybrid batteries
2. Verification, diagnosis and repair of vehicle accessories, lighting systems,
multiplex systems, systems, sub systems and components
3. Verification, diagnosis and repair of vehicle base and electronic steering and
suspension systems, sub systems and components
4. Engine block service and diagnosis (Engine bottom end)
5. Engine - fault diagnosis and repair
6. Repair of heating and air conditioning components, such as compressor
clutches, pressure valves and electrical and vacuum controls
Total Hours

Hours
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
4.25 - 8.50
25.5 - 51

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Class Activities
B. Discussion
C. Demonstrations
D. Laboratory Experiments
E. Problem-Solving Exercises and Skills Practices
F. Selected reading from automotive repair manuals
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Lab Projects
B. Number of successful completed jobs.
C. Effective use of time as compared to the flat rate manual.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Using Mitchell's or Honda ISIS reference material, access technical information and data
required for the assigned repair job that will be completed during the class meeting.
2. Using ALLDATA reference material, read the technical information and data required for
your assigned repair job. Be prepared to share with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a detailed repair order for the job to be completed in a class meeting. After the work
is completed, write a detailed story on the back of the repair order to industry standards.
2. Fill out an electronic parts requisition including all proper vehicle information to enable
professional parts counter personnel to order proper parts for a specific job.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Instructor-developed materials, handouts and worksheets
B. Manufacturer-developed materials, technical manuals.
C. Department vehicles
D. Student owned vehicles

Created/Revised by: George Medina
Date: 11/02/2015

