BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 21 - Automotive Brakes/Suspension and Steering Systems Lab
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 20
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
150 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

In this course students will develop and demonstrate the hands-on skills needed to verify, diagnose
and repair vehicle systems, sub systems, and components. Topics include: brake systems including
both drum and disc brake systems, Anti-lock Brake Systems (ABS), steering and suspension systems,
and electronic steering and suspension systems.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Diagnose and repair vehicle systems and components of disc brake systems.
B. Diagnose and repair vehicle systems and components of drum brake systems.
C. Diagnose and repair vehicle systems and components of anti-lock brake systems.
D. Diagnose and repair vehicle systems and components of suspension systems.
E. Diagnose and repair vehicle systems and components of steering systems.
F. Diagnose and repair vehicle systems and components of electronic steering/suspension systems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Brake rotors, drums and linings.
2. Diagnose and repair hydraulic system components.
3. Drum, disc and parking brake type brake systems.
4. Electronic brake systems, including ABS, stability and traction control.
5. Suspension systems.
6. Wheel servicing: safe removal and reinstallation of tires, alloy wheels, steel
wheels and wheel bearings.
7. Shocks and struts
8. Short arm/long arm and strut type suspensions.
9. Alignment readings using an alignment machine: adjustment of alignment
angle discrepancies.
10. Rack and pinion, re-circulating ball and electronic assist steering systems.
Total Hours

Hours
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
150.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Discussion
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
E. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers
B. Demonstration
C. Lab Projects
D. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read industry recognized technical information related to hydraulic systems and rebuild a
faulty brake caliper.
2. Read lab assignment instructions pertaining to alignment procedures then perform a four
way alignment on a vehicle.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Measure drum diameter on 6 drums and record results on a repair order with comparisons
to specification. Create a written diagnosis on results for discussion.
2. Conclude an ABS problem diagnosis and communicate cause and cure on a legal repair
order for customer review.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Schnubel, M. Automotive Steering and Suspension Systems. 6th Edition. Cengage, 2015.
B. Pickerill, K. Automotive Brake Systems. 6th Edition. Cengage, 2015.

Created/Revised by: Doug Conrad
Date: 11/02/2015

