BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 56 - Manual Transmissions/Drivetrains Lecture
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 57
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
35 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course provides theory and principles of operation in automotive manual
transmissions/transaxles, drive lines and axles. Shop practice includes diagnostics, testing, and
repairing of each system.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the different types of manual transmission, transaxles and four wheel drive
configurations used in cars and light trucks.
B. Understand and describe power-flow through manual transmissions and transaxles.
C. Identify clutch related components using industry terminology and describe the theory and
operation of the clutch system.
D. Distinguish the difference between Constant Velocity (CV) joints and propeller shafts and
describe the operational characteristics of them both.
E. Identify the components and describe power-flow through differential assemblies.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Transmission and transaxle identification, gear types and theory of
operation.
2. Rear wheel drive transmission powerflow.
3. Rear wheel drive transmission synchronizer operation, shifting, and
shifting mechanisms.
4. Front wheel drive transaxle power-flow.
5. Front wheel drive transaxle synchronizer operation, shifting, and shifting
mechanisms.
6. Transmission and transaxle diagnosis and repair.
7. Clutch component identification and clutch system description and
operation.
8. Clutch system diagnosis and repair.
9. Drive shaft and half shaft component identification and description of
operation.
10. Drive shaft and half shaft diagnosis and repair.
11. Differential and drive axle component identification and theory of operation.
12. Differential and drive axle diagnosis and repair.
13. Four wheel drive system and transfer case component identification. Four

Hours
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
2.00

13. Four wheel drive system and transfer case component identification. Four
wheel drive system theory of operation.
14. Four wheel dirve and transfer case diagnosis and repair.
15. Electronic four wheel drive systems theory of operation and diagnostics.
Total Hours

2.00
2.00
2.00
35.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Group Participation
E. Final Examination
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned reading on manual transmission power-flow. Complete the assigned
end of chapter quiz.
2. Using Mitchell or All Data, read the procedure on checking mainshaft end play and
demonstrate the procedure to the instructor.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Fill out a repair order on the front and back using B.A.R. standards and ensure the story
has the "3 C's".
2. In your work book, describe powerflow in a manual 5-speed transmission in reverse gear.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. PACT students complete the cognitive modules found in Honda's Online University
related to manual transmissions, transaxles, and four wheel drive systems.
2. View the videos and animations provided by the instructor related to powerflow, complete
the weekly quiz assignment, and submit to the instructor.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Jack Erjavec. Today's Technician: Automatic Transmissions and Transaxles Set. 6th Edition.
Cengage Learning, 2015.

Created/Revised by: Robert Holt
Date: 11/02/2015

