BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 9 - Automotive Engines Lab
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 8
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
135 hours Lab

2.5 Unit(s)

In this course students will develop and demonstrate the hands-on skills needed to repair the internal
combustion engine and related components. Students will learn the proper use of hand and power tools
and test equipment used in the automotive industry.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate accurate general engine diagnosis, removal, and reinstallation.
B. Perform basic cylinder head and valve train diagnosis and repair.
C. Diagnose and repair lubrication and cooling systems.
D. Diagnose a faulty engine block assembly and perform basic repairs.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Valve system service and diagnosis (Engine top end)
2. Engine block service and diagnosis (Engine bottom end)
a. Disassemble and diagnose
b. Precision measuring
3. Engine - fault diagnosis and repair
a. Diagnose cooling system
b. Diagnose valve train
c. Diagnose lower engine components
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Discussion
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Demonstration
C. Group Participation

Hours
30.00
45.00

60.00

135.00

D. Lab Projects
E. Final Examination
F. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the specifications on engine teardown and assembly and be prepared to discuss in
class.
2. Consult a repair publication before performing the intake valve removal procedure and be
ready to show the instructor where you found the correct repair information or
specifications.
B. Writing Assignments
1. To aid in reinstallation of bolts and miscellaneous parts, mark and/or organize them using
cans, drawing diagrams, tagging with masking tape, mounting them on/in
cardboard, using plastic bags, etc. Inspect all parts as they are removed from the engine.
Consult repair publications, your text, or ask the instructor for help any time you feel you
are not absolutely sure of the procedure being performed.
2. Acquire data about the proper procedures for removal and reassembly of a major engine
component and fill out the worksheet provided by the instructor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Halderman, J. Automotive Engines and Air Conditioning. Pearson, 2014.

Created/Revised by: George Medina
Date: 11/16/2015

