BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 20 - Automotive Brakes/Suspension and Steering Systems Lecture
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 21
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
50 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces the theory, operation, and repair in the areas of base brake systems, anti-lock
brake systems, and steering and suspension systems. Topics include: the application of Pascal's Law,
disk brake systems and their related components, drum brake systems, anti-lock brake system
operation and repair, suspension system operation and repair including electronic suspension and
steering systems.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the process used to diagnose and repair disk brake systems.
B. Describe the process used to diagnose and repair drum brake systems.
C. Describe the process used to diagnose and repair anti-lock brake systems.
D. Describe the process used to diagnose and repair suspension systems.
E. Describe the process used to diagnose and repair steering systems.
F. Describe the process used to diagnose and repair electronic suspension/steering systems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Brake operation, diagnosis and repair.
2. Hydraulics as they relate to master and secondary cylinders, including
piping, fittings and brake assist systems.
3. Disc, drum and parking type braking systems.
4. Electronic brake systems including anti-lock brakes, traction controls,
stability assist, brake mitigation systems, diagnosis and repair.
5. Steering, suspension systems, diagnosis and repair.
6. Tires, wheels, wheel bearings, diagnosis and repair.
7. Shock absorbers and strut dampening systems.
8. Short-Long Arm (SLA), multi-link and MacPherson strut type suspension
systems; industry recognised diagnosis and repair procedures.
9. Four-wheel alignment and diagnostic alignment angles.
10. Computer controlled suspension systems, rack and pinion steering gears
and four-wheel steering systems; industry recognized diagnosis and repair
procedure.
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
2.00
5.00
8.00
5.00

50.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Demonstration
D. Class participation
E. Final Examination
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read industry recognized procedures on proper alignment practices and be prepared to
discuss in class.
2. Read the assigned chapters on disc and drum brakes then complete the related test.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Following the lecture and discussion on steering gears, fill in the steering section of the
key notes book.
2. Complete the reading assignment on alignment procedures and write a one-page
summary.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete the Mechanical Safety portion of the SP2 safety test with a score of 80% or
better. Prior to working in lab, you must complete the following areas: Introduction, Fires,
Slips & Falls, Power Tools, Lifts, Operating Vehicles, Jump Starting, Chemicals and the
MSDS.
2. Complete the 17 self-study modules assigned by American Honda. Your instructor will
confirm that you have completed the required modules.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Schnubel, M. Automotive Steering and Suspension Systems. 6th Edition. Cengage, 2015.
B. Pickerill, K. Automotive Brake Systems. 6th Edition. Cengage, 2015.

Created/Revised by: Doug Conrad
Date: 11/02/2015

