BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 22 - Automotive Heating and Air Conditioning Lecture
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 23
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
40 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

In this course students study the theory and principles of operation of automotive Heating, Ventilation
and Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems as well as engine cooling system operation and repair. Basic
laws of heat transfer, refrigeration and compression/expansion of liquid/vapor are introduced.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe HVAC system diagnosis and repair procedures.
B. Identify basic refrigeration system diagnosis and repair procedures and processes.
C. Identify basic applications of heating, ventilation, and engine cooling systems diagnosis and
repair.
D. Compare HVAC operating systems and related controls, and identify appropriate diagnosis and
repair protocols.
E. List and define refrigerant recovery, recycling, and handling and procedures.
F. Describe various applications of heating, ventilation, and engine cooling systems diagnosis and
repair.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Principles and theory of heating and air conditioning operation
2. The dynamics of refrigerant in an operating air conditioning system
3. The operating principles and all individual parts of HVAC systems
4. Diagnosis and repair of the automotive HVAC system including
refrigeration, heating and ventilation components
Total Hours

Hours
9.00
8.00
7.00
16.00
40.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION

A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Final Examination
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review your Procedure Reference and be prepared to discuss safety and hazmat handling
in class.
2. Read the outlined chapter on refrigeration principles and prepare for your first quiz.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the reading about refrigerant recovery, recycling, and handling procedures and
fill in the identified sections in your "Things to Know" handout.
2. Write a one-page summary of your collaborative ventilation electrical schematic and
present it to the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Perform the 9 self-study modules assigned by American Honda. Your instructor will
confirm that you have completed the required modules.
2. Complete the Mechanical Safety portion of the SP2 safety test with a score of 80% or
better. Prior to working in the lab, you must complete the following areas: Introduction,
Fires, Slips & Falls, Power Tools, Lifts, Operating Vehicles, Jump Starting, Chemicals &
the MSDS.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Halderman, J. Automotive Engines and Air Conditioning. Pearson, 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Parts, accessories and complete systems or units of the automobile are used at the appropriate
time to convey related information, shop work study and reference.

Created/Revised by: George Medina
Date: 11/16/2015

