BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 30 - Engine Performance and Emission Controls Lecture
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 31
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
85 hours Lecture

5 Unit(s)

This course introduces the theory, operation, and repair of the ignition, fuel, engine management, and
emission control systems. This course is designed to help prepare the student to take the California
State Smog Check Inspector and Repair Technician Licensing exams.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the theory and operation of various types of automotive ignition systems.
B. Describe the theory and operation of various types of automotive fuel systems.
C. Describe the theory and operation of the computer-controlled engine management system.
D. Describe the theory and operation of various engine emission control systems.
E. Describe the California Bureau of Automotive Repair (BAR) requirements for performing smog
inspections and repairs.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Ignition system theory, design, and operation.
2. Fuel system theory, design, and operation.
3. Theory, design, and operation of computer-controlled engine management
systems.
4. Theory, design, and operation of emission control systems.
5. California BAR procedures for performing emissions inspection (Smog
Check) and repair of inspection failures.
Total Hours

Hours
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
25.00
85.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework

D. Class participation
E. Final Examination
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. After reading the BAR Smog Check Inspection Manual, be prepared to verbally describe
how to perform a Smog Check Inspection.
2. After reading the chapter on "Electronic Fuel Injection" in the Engine Performance
Classroom Manual, be prepared to verbally discuss how the fuel injector pulse width is
affected by changes in engine load and RPM.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In the AUT 30 Homework Book, write a 100 word response explaining the relationship of
the three exhaust gases (CO, HC, NOx), and explain how a catalytic converter can
minimize these gases.
2. In the AUT 30 Homework Book, write short answers of at least 30 words, for each of the
ten questions at the end of Chapter 8 "Electronic Fuel Injection," in the Engine
Performance Classroom Manual.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Post a blog of at least 200 words, discussing new or emerging technology in the area of
"Engine Performance." Some examples would be Direct Fuel Injection or HCCI Engines.
2. Post substantive comments of at least 50 words, on each of your classmates' blog
discussions of new or emerging technology in the area of "Engine Performance."
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Pickerill, Ken. Today's Technician Automotive Engine Performance Classroom & Shop
Manuals . 6th Edition. Delmar Cengage Learning, 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Safety Glasses

Created/Revised by: Bradley Dressen
Date: 02/22/2016

