BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 31 - Engine Performance and Emission Controls Lab
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41 (or concurrent enrollment)
Co-requisite(s): AUT 30
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
255 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

In this course, students will develop and demonstrate the hands-on skills needed to diagnose and repair
the ignition, fuel, engine management, and emission control systems used in today's vehicles. The
student will also perform various emission control inspections (Smog Check) and perform diagnosis
and repair of Smog Check failures, as per California Bureau of Automotive Repair (BAR) standards.
This instruction will help prepare the student to take the California State Smog Check Inspector and
Repair Technician Licensing Exams.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Diagnose and repair various vehicle ignition system problems, using industry-approved tools
and techniques.
B. Diagnose and repair various fuel system problems, using industry- approved tools and
techniques.
C. Diagnose and repair various computer-controlled engine management system problems, using
industry-approved tools and techniques.
D. Diagnose and repair various emission control system problems, using industry-approved tools
and techniques.
E. Demonstrate how to perform the three types of emission control system inspections (Smog
Check) according to California BAR standards.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Testing and repair of conventional and electronic automotive ignition
systems.
2. Testing and repair of various types of automotive fuel systems, to include
throttle body injection, multi-port fuel injection, and direct injection.
3. Testing and repair of various types of computer-controlled engine
management systems, to include speed-density and mass airflow types. This
section will also include working with On-Board Diagnostics 2nd
Generation (OBDII) and Controller Area Network (CAN) type systems.
4. Hands-on practice, performing emission control inspections (Smog Check)
while adhering to California BAR standard. Practice will include the three
current types of inspections: Two-Speed Idle (TSI), Acceleration
Simulation Mode (ASM), and OBD Inspection System (OIS). Students will
also perform diagnosis of Smog Check failures.
5. Testing and repair of various emission control sytems, to include Positive

Hours
50.00
50.00
50.00

55.00

50.00

5. Testing and repair of various emission control sytems, to include Positive
Crankcase Ventilation (PCV), Evaporative Emission Control (EVAP),
Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR), Air Injection Reactor (AIR), and
catalytic converters.
Total Hours

50.00

255.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Problem-Solving Sessions
D. Reading Assignments
E. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Lab Projects
C. Final Examination
D. Performance Examinations
E. Practical Evaluations
F. Laboratory evaluation will be by observation and the number of completed jobs which are
documented by job sheets and a hands-on performance lab final.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on "Electronic Fuel Injection" in the Engine Performance Shop Manual.
After studying this material, be prepared to demonstrate an injector balance test and a fuel
pressure test.
2. Read the chapter on "Emission Control System Diagnosis and Service" in the Engine
Performance Shop Manual. After studying this material, be prepared to demonstrate how
to test a catalytic converter and an exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) system.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Perform a Smog Check Inspection in the lab. Complete a customer repair order following
the standards set forth by the California BAR.
2. In the AUT31 Lab Worksheets Book, complete the "OBDII Lab Worksheet". The final
requirement of this worksheet is to look up the OBDII Drive Cycle Enable Criteria, for the
vehicle that you are working on. Describe, in writing, the difficulties that you might have
in completing the drive cycle, such as traffic conditions, terrain, vehicle conditions, time
required, etc. This writing assignment must be at least 100 words.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Go to an automotive repair facility of your choice (dealership, independent shop, or chain
store) to observe the shop operations including the flow of repair orders, the parts ordering
process, the technicians at work, etc. Post a blog of at least 300 words, describe your
experiences at this facility. Read and comment on at least one other blog.
2. Pick a day when the BAR Smog Check Referee is working at the B.C. Skyway Center,
and observe the work being performed. Post a blog of at least 300 words, comparing and
contrasting the Referee to a Smog Check Station. Read and comment on at least one other
blog.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Pickerell, Ken. Today's Technician Automotive Engine Performance Classroom & Shop

Manuals . 6th Edition. Delmar Cengage Learning, 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Safety glasses

Created/Revised by: Bradley Dressen
Date: 02/22/2016

