BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
AUT 42 - Advanced Specialized Automotive Electronics and Microcomputers
Prerequisite(s): AUT 41
Recommended Prep: AUT 1
Transfer Status: CSU
68 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

5.5 Unit(s)

This course is a continuation of AUT 41 and in this course the student will build upon fundamentals of
electricity gained in AUT 41 to develop logical, strategy-based diagnostic routines. These routines
will be used to diagnose electrical faults found in Hybrid, PZEV (Partial Zero Emissions Vehicle),
gasoline, diesel and alternative fuel vehicles. The manufacturer-specific scan tools will be emphasized
along with the advanced diagnostic routines needed to correct circuit anomalies such as shorts, opens,
and parasitic draws. Multiplex systems will be discussed including their analog and digital inputs and
outputs. This course will provide the student with the knowledge and understanding of manufacture
specific electrical systems found in modern vehicles.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Navigate and operate manufacturer-specific scan tools.
B. Use manufacturer-specific scan tools to monitor, record, play back and up-load vehicle data
stream information.
C. Identify and describe the differences between brush and brush-less motors (hybrid).
D. Identify, diagnose and service OBD II (On Board Diagnostic) electrical connectors.
E. Identify, explain and test multiplex control module inputs.
F. Identify, explain and test multiplex control module outputs.
G. Use manufacturer-specific tools to diagnose parasitic draws.
H. Develop a strategy based diagnostic routine to diagnose and repair various circuit faults.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Manufacturer-specific scan tool operation and navigation
2. Manufacturer-specific use of semiconductors in control modules
3. Electric motor types theory and operation
4. OBD II electrical terminal diagnosis and repair
5. ECU (Engine Control Unit) multiplex communication networks testing and
troubleshooting
6. ECU multiplex module inputs and outputs testing and troubleshooting
7. Parasitic draw testing and troubleshooting
8. Strategy based troubleshooting
9. Troubleshooting specific circuit faults
Total Hours
Lab

Hours
3.50
17.00
3.50
3.50
7.00
7.00
3.50
16.00
7.00
68.00

Lab
Topics
1. Scan tool navigation and operation
2. Scan tool data stream capture and DTC (Diagnostic Trouble Code)
diagnostics
3. Testing electrical motors
4. Servicing OBD II multi-pin connectors
5. Multiplex network circuit analysis
6. Digital and analog input testing
7. Digital output testing
8. Parasitic draw testing using manufacture specific tools
9. Troubleshooting by dividing a circuit
10. Troubleshooting short circuits and relays
11. Strategy based troubleshooting application
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
16.00
4.00
8.00
4.00
16.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.50
8.00
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Class participation
C. Written or Oral Examinations
D. Practical Evaluations
E. Group Participation
F. One hands-on individual lab final
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the module “MVCI (Modular Vehicle communication Interface) DTC Diagnostics”.
Be prepared to demonstrate the use of the scan tool in in lab.
2. Read the module regarding “Testing control module inputs” and take the corresponding
test.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Compose a 100+ word journal entry describing in detail the function of a thermistor in an
engine.
2. Compose a 100+ word journal entry regarding the proper way to solder an OBD II
electrical terminal.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Communicate with your lab partner and develop a strategy to diagnose the instructor
provided electrical fault. Your dialogue must reflect industry best practices and
professional language.

2. Research both manufacture and industry specific web sites for TSB’s (Technical Service
Bulletin) related to the instructor provided electrical fault. Be prepared to apply what you
learned to a bugged car.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Web-based Learning Modules delivered via On-line University/American Honda
B. Electrical test boards, parts and accessories and complete systems or units of the automobile are
used at the appropriate time to convey related information, shop work and reference.

Created/Revised by: Robert Holt
Date: 11/02/2015

