BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 62 - Introduction to Medical Coding
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II and ALH
104
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to procedural and diagnostic coding used in physicians’ offices.
Through analysis of case histories and surgical reports, students will learn to distinguish between
primary and secondary diagnoses codes, to assign the proper procedural codes, and to explain the
importance of accurate medical documentation and clinical records. Students will gain familiarity with
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), International Classification of Diseases--9th Revision;
Clinical Modification (ICD-9CM); and ICD-10CM code books; guidelines to be followed; and
required supporting documents.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Examine Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act's (HIPAA) role in determining
reimbursement and compliance in the medical office.
B. Identify and describe the main components of outpatient coding.
C. Contrast the components of ICD-9-CM coding with ICD-10-CM coding.
D. Identify and describe CPT and the Level II National Codes (HCPCS) and the part each plays in
medical office coding.
E. Explain the differences in the skills needed for Inpatient Coding as compared with outpatient
coding.
F. Code patient diagnoses and treatments using ICD-9-CM, ICD-10-CM, CPT, and HCPCS codes.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Reimbursement, HIPAA, and Compliance
2. ICD-9-CM Diagnostic Coding
3. ICD-10-CM Diagnostic Coding
4. Introduction to evaluation and management coding used in physicians'
offices (CPT Coding)
5. Inpatient coding used in physicians' offices (CPT Coding)
6. Anesthesia coding used in physicians' offices (CPT Coding)
7. Surgery coding used in physicians' offices (CPT Coding)
8. Radiology/X-ray coding used in physicians' offices (CPT Coding)
9. Pathology/Laboratory coding used in physicians' offices (CPT Coding)
10. Other non-surgical services coding used in physicians' offices (CPT
Coding)
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
9.00
9.00
4.00
3.00
7.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
51.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an operative report on a patient. Identify the appropriate codes for the primary
surgery portion.
2. Read the information titled "ICD-10-CM Outpatient Coding and Reporting Guidelines".
Using the ICD-10-CM, identify the correct code for a list of 10 diagnoses.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using a problem-focused patient's history and examination, determine the diagnosis and
management options, the risks if left untreated, the level of decision-making complexity,
and the correct CPT code for the case. Write a one-page paper explaining your answers.
2. In a one-page paper describe how hospital coding differs from medical office coding.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a medical coder employed in a doctor's office. Write a one-page paper
describing a typical day in the medical office. Include any recommendations the coder
offers about being successful in the field.
2. Do an online search to find out what testing programs are available and how much training
is needed to become a certified medical coder. Be prepared to share your findings in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Buck, Carol. Step-By-Step Medical Coding. Elsevier Saunders, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 10/21/2013

