BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 12 - Business Writing Skills
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers the basic knowledge and skills necessary for effective written communication for
the workplace. The focus of this course is on the mechanics of business writing by applying rules of
standard business document formatting, proper sentence structure, coherent paragraph development,
correct grammar and punctuation, proofreading, and professional writing style as required for
professional work environments.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply standard business document formatting to business letters, memoranda, email messages,
and short reports.
B. Employ correct grammar and utilize correct business punctuation in writing business
documents.
C. Compose clear, concise sentences and write complete, coherent paragraphs in business
documents.
D. Analyze business documents for correctness and apply appropriate proofreading marks.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Apply standard business document formatting to business letters,
memoranda, email messages, and short reports.
2. Employ correct grammar in writing business documents.
3. Utilize correct punctuation marks in business writing.
4. Compose clear, concise sentences for business documents.
5. Write complete, coherent paragraphs in business documents.
6. Analyze business documents for correctness, apply appropriate proofreading
marks, edit for clarity and conciseness, and produce professional final
business documents.
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
9.00
4.00
8.00
9.00
11.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Reading Assignments
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on "modifying words." Be prepared to apply the principles you learned
from the reading to twenty business-related sentences contained at the end of the chapter.
2. Read the article about effective proofreading skills and how to use proofreading marks
when editing a business document. Be prepared to identify errors by marking the business
document with proofreading marks.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the business writer's workshop assignment regarding eliminating redundant
words and writing concise sentences in a business document. The document should be
from one to two pages in length. Be prepared for a class discussion on this writing
assignment.
2. Complete the business writer's workshop assignment regarding the characteristics of
business letters and the "Six Cs" (conciseness, clarity, correctness, courtesy,
completeness, and confidence). Use the principles of the "Six Cs" to revise a poorly
written business letter contained in the textbook. The document should be one page in
length.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Compose a professional e-mail message utilizing the principles presented in the textbook
about planning an e-mail message, the difference between an e-mail and an interoffice
memorandum, and composing an effective business message. Be prepared to discuss your
e-mail message in class and to apply your knowledge to correcting a poorly written
business message.
2. Complete the business writer's workshop regarding an internal business proposal. Edit
your first draft using professional proofreading marks and then type the final document
using business document formatting. Be prepared to discuss it in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. William A. Sabin. Gregg Reference Manual. 11 Edition. Cengage, 2011.
B. Mary Ellen Guffey. Business English. 11 Edition. Cengage, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 11th Edition or equivalent (paperback or online)

Created/Revised by: Dorene Thompson
Date: 11/04/2013

