BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 51 - Records Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the increasingly complex field of records management. The class
emphasizes the importance of effective records management for all types of documents from their
creation or receipt, through their processing, distribution, organization, storage, and retrieval, to their
ultimate disposition. Students will investigate the management functions necessary to operate a
records management program effectively.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Examine and contrast the more popular methods used for records storage and retrieval including
alphabetic, subject, and numeric.
B. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of storage and retrieval techniques used for physical
(paper) records, image records, and electronic media.
C. Assess the importance of managing the entire life cycle of a record including its creation,
distribution/use, maintenance, and disposition.
D. Design database files to create more efficient records management systems, including the
creation of effective forms, accession logs, record sorts, and master and relative indexes.
E. Explore the components of an effective records and information management program including
records audits, cost-effective records storage and labor methods, the need for records and
information manuals, knowledge management, implementing a disaster recovery plan, and
migration of records.
F. Identify the criteria needed to create an effective physical records management system and select
the storage components that most appropriately fit those standards.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. An Overview of Records Management
2. Alphabetic Indexing Rules 1-10
3. Electronic File Management
4. Alphabetic Records Management, Equipment, and Procedures
5. Storing, Retrieving, and Transferring Records
6. Subject and Numeric Records Storage Systems
7. Electronic and Image Records
8. Records and Information Management Program
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
14.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
5.00
5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Experience/Internship
C. Group Discussions
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Projects
F. Homework
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. In the assigned article Designing Effective Forms, read about the techniques of good
forms creation and management, including the differences between constant data and
variable data, and appropriate forms design methods. Create a form applying those
techniques.
2. Read the assigned article titled Preparing a Records Inventory for your Business. Be
prepared to define a records inventory, discuss the importance to the records management
function, and describe what components are included.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create a document to summarize your investigation about RAID (redundant array of
independent disks) and how it is applied to the records management function. The
information should be presented in a format appropriate for submission to your employer.
2. Research three links on the Internet about what safeguards businesses use to prevent
identify theft, as well as what actions to take if company files have been compromised.
Summarize the information you found, citing each site in proper citation format.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create an Access database using the following fields and entering the correct data type: ID
Number, Filing Segment, Key Unit, Unit, 2, Unit 3, Unit 4, and Unit 5. Enter 25 records,
prepare a query to select only those records within the state of IL, and create a report
showing the results.
2. Following prescribed records management techniques, index, code, and sort 50 business
correspondence items in proper alphabetic order, creating cross-references as needed. Be
prepared to locate the requested files and present the information requested from each file
within the 10-minute period allowed.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Read Smith, Judith. Records Management Projects. 9th Edition. South-Western Educational
Publishing, 2011.
B. Read Smith, Judith. Records Management. 9th Edition. South-Western Educational Publishing,
2011.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 12/03/2012

