BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 76 - Managing Electronic Health Records
Prerequisite(s): BCIS 63 and BCIS 75
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This advanced-level course introduces students to electronic health records (EHRs) and their place in a
physician's office. The curriculum reinforces the relationship between all of the components needed
for a complete patient medical record including the clinical, administrative, and reimbursement
components. Topics in this class are based on the national curriculum competencies developed by the
Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Create an effective medical practice management system using Electronic Health Records
(EHRs).
B. Evaluate the transition from paper-based records offices to EHR offices.
C. Assess the accuracy of records after being converted from a manual to an EHR format.
D. Describe the relationship between the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) and electronic health records.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Electronic Health Records
2. Overview of Electronic Health Records Software
3. Privacy, Confidentiality, and Security
4. Transitioning from Paper Charts to Electronic Health Records
5. Administrative Use of the Electronic Health Record
6. Clinical Use of the Electronic Health Record
7. Using the Electronic Health Record for Reimbursement
8. Health Promotion, Patient Education, and Clinical Decision Support
9. Using Electronic Health Record for Patient Education
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
9.00
9.00
9.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Reading Assignments

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review the information on Evaluation and Management (E/M) from the Current
Procedural Terminology (CPT) manual. Be prepared to discuss why you think the amount
of time spent with the patient does not weigh as heavily as the other three factors in
determining the proper E/M code?
2. Examine five different EHR software programs for doctors' offices. Pick the one you feel
is best and be prepared to discuss your findings in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. You are investigating the problem of missed test results. In your reading, you discover
that 15% of physicians report experiencing two or more instances in which such
oversights caused life-threatening delays in diagnosis or treatment of their patients. In a
one-page paper, discuss how features of the EHR might prevent such oversights, thereby
improving patient care?
2. In a two-page paper, list the pros and cons of a paper system versus EHR. Then describe
which approach you think would be more efficient, supporting your decision with
information from your list.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Patients are right to take an interest in protecting the integrity of their health information,
which may be compromised by careless handling of records or lax security policies.
Research the topic "HIPAA Privacy Breaches". Create a list of five violations and be
prepared to discuss your findings with your class members.
2. Interview two of your classmates as if they are new patients and create new electronic
health records for them.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Devore, Amy. The Electronic Health Record for the Physician's Office. Elsevier, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 12/02/2013

