BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 63 - Introduction to Medical Billing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II and ALH
104 and BCIS 62
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the billing techniques used in medical outpatient facilities. The
focus of the course will be on the accurate preparation and maintenance of clinical records and
medical documentation. Students analyze private insurance plans, Medicare, Medi-Cal, and Worker’s
Compensation, as well as properly complete the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
1500 claim form used in medical outpatient facilities. Topics include working with specific insurance
companies, filing clean (error-free) claims, submitting denied claims, utilizing effective collection
strategy, and handling the appeal process.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze Compliance Alerts and HIPAA Regulations in relation to proper medical insurance
billing techniques.
B. Explain the importance of clinical records and medical documentation for creating claims.
C. Compare and contrast the various health insurance plans and their requirements for medical
billing.
D. Create and complete clean (error-free) claim billing insurance forms (CMS-1500) utilizing
proper diagnostic and procedural codes.
E. Explain the techniques of handing collections.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Medical Billing
2. Clinical Records, Medical Documentation, and Audits/Reviews
3. Completing the CMS-1500 Form
4. Medical Billing Procedures, and Resubmissions utilizing the CMS-1500
Form
5. Medical Practice Accounting for Handling Collections.
6. Guidelines for Working with Public Health Insurance Programs
7. Guidelines for Working with Private Health Insurance Programs
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
9.00
7.00
7.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Performance Examinations
D. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article on "Ethical and Legal Issues of Medical Billing." Define ethics and outline
the ethical standards set by the American Medical Association that providers should
follow. Be prepared to share your findings with your class.
2. Read an article on "Clinical Records and Medical Documentation" and be prepared to
discuss the importance of the 15 rules of medical documentation with your class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a one-page paper, complete the following statement and provide additional information
to justify your answer: "If you needed to verify a diagnosis, affected body area, or spelling
of terms and definitions, you would probably refer to the . . . ."
2. In a one-page paper, describe the biller's responsibilities in handling office collections and
the reports created.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Given a client's insurance contract and medical documentation indicating diagnosis and
treatment, complete a clean CMS-1500 Claim Form Matrix.
2. Create a spreadsheet identifying the features for each of the medical insurance
plans--Medicare/Medicaid, Worker's Compensation, Health Maintenance Organizations,
and Preferred Provider Organizations. Be prepared to share your spreadsheet with your
class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fordney, Marilyn . Insurance Handbook For Medical Office. 13th Edition. Saunders, 2014.
B. Fordney, Marilyn. Insurance Handbook for Medical Office, Student Workbook. 13th Edition.
Saunders, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 10/21/2013

