BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 13 - Business Communication
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course applies the principles of creating ethical and effective business communication to letters,
memos, emails, and written and oral reports. The course emphasizes planning, organizing, composing,
and revising business documents utilizing appropriate software to prepare and deliver written
documents and professional-level oral reports.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the elements of the communication process.
B. Analyze how word selection and usage affects communication.
C. Solve business communication problems through planning, problem solving, organizing,
writing, listening, and presenting techniques.
D. Illustrate sensitivity to audience needs and desire, including cross-cultural situations.
E. Plan, organize, write, and revise letters, memos, emails, and reports suitable for a variety of
business situations, including quantitative (e.g. accounting and finance) and business legal
contexts.
F. Plan and deliver individual or team oral presentations for business meetings.
G. Evaluate communication in an internationalization and global context.
H. Select a proper delivery format --face-to-face vs. electronic-- and identify the strengths of each
modality.
I. Compare the various types of social media and related Internet writing contexts.
J. Adjust composition, prose, and rhetorical language use for optimal conciseness and clarity.
K. Assess the importance of social etiquette in a business environment.
L. Evaluate the differences between primary sources and secondary sources.
M. Examine the importance of original work, the role of proper citations and references, and the
ability to avoid plagiarism of either a deliberate or inadvertent nature.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Theory of Written and Oral Communication
2. Professionalism: Team, Meeting, Listening, Nonverbal, and Etiquette Skills
3. Intercultural Communication
4. Revising Business Messages
5. Organizing and Writing Business Messages
6. Revising Business Messages
7. Electronic Messages and Digital Media
8. Positive Messages

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00

9. Negative Messages
10. Persuasive Messages
11. Informational and Analytical Reports
12. Informal Business Reports
13. Proposals and Formal Reports
14. Written and Oral Business Presentations
15. The Job Search, Resumes, and Cover Letters
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Class participation
C. Written Communications
D. Homework/Quizzes/Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and discuss with your team the document "Defining Student Professionalism" by
Roger Eakins. Using the information from this article and from your textbook, collaborate
with your team to create a document titled BCIS 13 Code of Ethics.
2. Read the Business Writing Process from "Essentials of Business Communication" by
Guffey. Be prepared to discuss five techniques used to develop the "you" attitude.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Companies from Wall Street to the Rust Belt are launching or improving programs to help
employees lose weight. Create a memo announcing the new program "weighing in at
work."
2. Software engineers want to copy the latest version of Adobe Photoshop for personal use.
Your task is to create a revision that refuses this workplace request and utilizes the
techniques appropriate for this type of situation.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. As a member of a student task force, you are asked to identify something you perceive as a
problem at Butte College. Working in groups, select an issue to study, create a survey,
conduct interviews, and prepare a summary to present to the class.
2. Create a credit refusal letter to Rudy's Camera Shop declining their sizable order. The
rejection is based on poor credit history. As an alternative suggest that your company is
willing to accept smaller orders if Rudy's is willing to pay cash.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Guffey, Mary Ellen & Loewy, Dana. Business Communication: Process and Product. 7th
Edition. Cengage, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 11/05/2012

