BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 59 - Beginning Legal Office Procedures
3 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III and Keyboarding Skill of
35 wpm
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture
This course introduces legal terminology, preparation of legal documents and correspondence, and
court scheduling. Emphasis is placed on developing legal vocabulary, enhancing legal communication
skills, building strong problem-solving techniques, and utilizing technical abilities in a legal office
setting.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and correctly apply legal terminology as it relates to the various areas of law.
B. Analyze the procedures followed and forms utilized in probate, civil, family, criminal, and
corporate law offices.
C. Identify the different sections of legal documents and evaluate the quality of the content.
D. Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of various scheduling tools used in the court litigation
process.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The field of legal office administration.
2. Terminology, forms, scheduling, and other activities involved in a Probate
Law office.
3. Terminology, forms, scheduling, and other activities involved in a Civil
Law office.
4. Terminology, forms, scheduling, and other activities involved in a Family
Law office.
5. Terminology, forms, scheduling, and other activities involved in a Criminal
Law office.
6. Terminology, forms, scheduling, and other activities involved in a Corporate
Law office.
Total Hours

Hours
12.00
7.00
14.00
12.00
4.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture

hour of lecture
F. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Papers
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Complete assigned reading of articles by Robert Half. Identify all of the different areas of
law mentioned; then utilizing all of the tools available to you, identify into which area of
law each of the Chico CA attorneys fit. Be prepared to share your work with the class.
2. Select an article from the Legal Secretary Quarterly publication, summarize its content,
and be ready to discuss in class whether you agree of disagree with the author's point.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using the FL scenario provided by the instructor, prepare the necessary documents and
describe the steps taken to complete the process.
2. Given a client interview narrative, identify the required forms and provide the justification
for their use.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Utilizing all of your resources, identify the areas of law. Select the one that most interests
you and explain why.
2. Given a typical set of corporate by-laws, identify and accurately list the corporate
structure.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. The Rutter Group. Legal Secretary's Reference Guide . The Rutter Group, 2012.
B. Heinrich-Wells. California Styles Manual and the Bluebook. Paradigm Publishing, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 12/03/2012

