BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 18 - Introduction to Business Technology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: BCIS 84; ability to key 25 wpm; Reading Level IV; English
Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
42.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an examination of information and communication technologies used in today’s
businesses and the impact these technologies are having on today's workplaces. The course will
include examination and application of a wide range of information and communication technology
tools used to support and enhance business functions and processes. Focus will be placed on solving a
variety of business problems, improving organizational productivity, and achieving the goals of
business.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and explain how business technology supports business functions and processes;
B. Assess the impact of technology on today’s businesses;
C. Describe current and emerging technologies used in business;
D. Identify, describe, and use the features and functions of a computer operating system;
E. Identify, describe, and use the features of an Internet browser;
F. Identify, describe, and apply various input technologies to enter and manipulate information
accurately and efficiently;
G. Identify, describe, and use productivity software, including word processing, spreadsheets,
databases, and presentations, to support business tasks;
H. Evaluate the communication technologies used to enhance and improve internal and external
business communication; and
I. Effectively and efficiently conduct online research, and evaluate results for accuracy, relevancy,
and currency.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Impact of technology and its role in today's businesses
2. Emerging technologies used in business
3. Features and functions of computer operating systems
4. Features of Internet browsers
5. Input Technologies
6. Productivity Software and its applications in business
7. Technological Communication
8. Internet Research
Total Hours

Hours
2.50
2.50
10.00
5.00
5.00
10.00
2.50
5.00
42.50

Lab
Topics
1. Features and functions of computer operating systems
2. Features of Internet browsers
3. Input Technologies
4. Productivity Software and its applications in business
5. Technological Communication
6. Internet Research
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
1.50
3.00
11.00
3.00
3.00
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Group Participation
E. Lab Projects
F. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Conduct online research to locate three current and relevant articles regarding how social
media tools are being used in business. Once located, read articles, compile information,
and write a three-page report summarizing the three articles and cite sources using The
Gregg Reference Manual: A Manual of Style, Grammar, Usage, and Formatting.
2. Read articles and/or chapter on the impact that emerging technologies is having on today's
businesses. Be prepared to discuss this topic during the next class period.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Work with two other students in the class to research a business technology topic. Locate
and identify five articles regarding a business technology topic and compose a two-page
report summarizing this topic. Use the report to create a multi-media presentation and
present findings to the class. Be prepared to engage class in
discussion regarding the topic.
2. After reading the chapter enhancing a document with graphics using Word, select a
minimum of three stated objectives that are listed at the beginning of the chapter and
write an Objective Analysis for each. Each Objective Analysis should include the
following: 1) Selected objectives; and 2)Written discussion (one or more paragraphs for
each objective) of whether you feel that
you have met the objective once the material has been covered. If you feel you have not
met the objective, then please include reason(s) why.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments

1. After completing the section in the textbook covering character formatting in Word,
complete the projects at the end of the chapter during in either a Butte College open lab or
by using a personal computer that has Word 2010 installed.
2. Complete the online concepts checks covering creating, editing, and formatting a
worksheet using Excel using the course's Blackboard site in either a Butte College open
lab or by using a personal computer with Internet access.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Seguin, D.. Computer Concepts. 1 Edition. EMCParadigm, 2013.
B. Murphy, J. . Welcome to Microsoft Office 2010. 1st Edition. Labriynth, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Sandra Sloan
Date: 03/04/2013

