BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 50 - Office Administration
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the skills, traits, and attitudes of the successful administrative
professional. Discussion topics include time and stress management, personal appearance,
communication, records handling, mail, and financial management. In addition, students will complete
projects in the areas of travel, minute taking, meeting planning, and effective job search techniques.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate the attitudes, responsibilities, and expectations of the office administrative
professional.
B. Identify and assess the proper behaviors necessary for working ethically in all facets of
professional life.
C. Develop and reinforce effective internal and external communication techniques with
individuals and groups.
D. Identify and apply the administrative assistant's job duties in managing an office's records,
making travel arrangements, handling mail, and completing financial reports.
E. Recognize and apply the principles of effective job search techniques.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Defining the roles and responsibilities of an ethical administrative
professional.
2. Developing the business tools necessary for the successful administrative
professional.
3. Exploring techniques for creating good time management, reducing stress,
dealing with difficult people, and developing positive business relationships.
4. Coordinating meeting planning, taking minutes, and effectively utilizing
workplace collaboration tools (email, instant messaging, video conferencing,
and shared workspace).
5. Planning national and international business travel, anticipating cultural
differences, and preparing expense reports
6. Exploring common employee benefits and how they may affect the
employee's paycheck.
7. Researching, Applying, and Preparing for the Job and the Job Interview
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
6.00
8.00
9.00

7.00
3.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Given a document from an employee handbook with a reading level of 9.0, reduce the
reading level to 8.0, making it easier for all to better understand the message.
2. Read "Becoming a Professional" from the textbook. Identify three short-term and three
long-term professional goals. Create a timeline for reaching each goal, including steps
along the way, and be prepared to share your timeline with your class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a company from the list of Fortune 100 companies. Write a one-page report that
will focus on what is an ethical company and why the selected Fortune 100 company has
met the qualifications to be included on this list.
2. Using correct formatting techniques and appropriate business communication skills,
prepare all of the necessary documents required to apply for a Secretary III position at
Butte College. Include a resume, cover letter, diversity statement, and application.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a business meeting on the Butte College campus, take minutes of the meeting, and
prepare the minutes as if they were to be distributed to the attendees.
2. Complete a time management study to determine how your time is spent. Upon
completion of the study, submit a two-page, written evaluation that includes a summary of
the results, recognition of potential time wasters, and techniques you can use to improve
the use of your time in the future.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fulton-Calkins, Patsy,Ph.D., CPS. The Administrative Professional Technology & Procedures.
14th Edition. South-Western Cengage Learning, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 03/04/2013

