BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 28 - Microsoft Word for Windows
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course covers a recent version of Microsoft Word for Windows for students who have an
understanding of computers and desire comprehensive knowledge of word processing. Course content
includes creating and formatting documents; creating and modifying headers and footers; inserting
objects such as clipart and images; creating and modifying tables; merging documents to create letters,
envelopes and labels; creating charts; proofing documents; and automating formatting.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Create, save, print, close, open, and edit a Microsoft Word document.
B. Enhance documents with special formatting including fonts, line spacing, tabs, and indents.
C. Proofread and edit a variety of business documents using the Spell Checker, Thesaurus, and
Grammar Checker.
D. Create and format tables, charts, columns, outlines, templates, table of contents, and indexes.
E. Format and merge form files and data files to create business documents, including letters,
envelopes and labels.
F. Utilize special features such as find and replace, headers and footers, date and time,
AutoCorrect, AutoText, drawing, WordArt, images, styles and web pages.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Creating and Modifying Documents
2. Formatting Characters, Paragraphs, and Pages
3. Customizing Documents and Creating and Modifying Headers and Footers
4. Creating and Formatting Tables
5. Inserting and Customizing Objects
6. Creating and Customizing Charts
7. Merging Documents to Create Letters, Envelopes and Labels
8. Creating, Formatting and Arranging SmartArt Diagrams and Organizational
Charts
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
5.00
4.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Formatting Characters, Paragraphs, and Pages

Hours
9.00

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Customizing Documents and Creating and Modifying Headers and Footers
Creating and Modifying Documents
Creating and Formatting Tables
Inserting and Customizing Objects
Creating and Customizing Charts
Merging Documents to Create Letters, Envelopes and Labels
Creating, Formatting and Arranging SmartArt Diagrams and Organizational
Charts
Total Hours

6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
4.00
8.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter about preparing documents and complete the chapter Projects and Skills
Checks.
2. Read the chapter about paragraph formatting and complete the chapter Projects and Skills
Checks.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write about what you have learned in class related to the Student Learning Objectives
noted in the Course Syllabus. Provide at least one specific example of knowledge or skill
learned for each Student Learning Objective. Be prepared to discuss this assignment in
class.
2. Write about your three favorite features of Microsoft Word, including specifically what
you like about these features and how you will use them in the workplace or in your other
classes. Be prepared to discuss this assignment in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a Glossary of Terms document using the Constantia font style and 12-point font
size. Double space between glossary terms. Using the Mini Toolbar and then the Format
Painter, apply the bold feature to every term. Use the Change Case feature to change the
document title at the top of the document to be all uppercase. Apply the Gradient text
effect of Blue, Accent I to the title. Apply a Theme of your choice. Spell and grammar
check your document. Proofread the document, then use the Print Preview feature to view
all pages of the document. Save and backup this document.
2. Insert clip art with an ocean theme two lines below the document title of the travel flyer.
Change the Brightness of the clip art to -20% and the Contrast to +20%. Apply a thick
border to the clip art. Format the travel site list and activities within the flyer with bullets.
Choose a bullet style of your choice. Insert a document footer which includes the date and

Choose a bullet style of your choice. Insert a document footer which includes the date and
time in the left section of the footer. Proofread the document, then use the Print Preview
feature to view the document. Save and backup this document.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Nita Hewitt Rutkosky. Microsoft Word 2010, Benchmark Series, Levels 1 & 2, EMC Paradigm.
2011 Edition. EMC Paradigm, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. SNAP package, EMC Paradigm

Created/Revised by: Dorene Thompson
Date: 12/03/2012

