BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 70K - Adobe Acrobat Professional
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: BCIS 28
Transfer Status: CSU
12.75 hours Lecture
12.75 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to Adobe Acrobat software. The course includes an overview of all
Adobe Acrobat products and their functionality. It offers instruction and application of Portable
Document Format (PDF) creation from multiple sources, modifying existing PDF documents, and
creating forms. Students will need access to Adobe Acrobat to successfully complete this course.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Open, navigate, and view a variety of PDF documents including forms, schematics, and written
documents
B. Create PDF documents from a variety of sources including Microsoft Office files, web pages,
photos, and screen captures
C. Save and export Adobe Acrobat files
D. Utilize special features of Adobe Acrobat software
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of Adobe Acrobat
2. Viewing and manipulating PDF documents
3. Creating PDF documents
4. Special features in Adobe Acrobat
5. Creating Forms
Total Hours

Hours
0.75
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
12.75

Lab
Topics
1. Overview of Adobe Acrobat
2. Viewing and manipulating PDF documents
3. Creating PDF documents
4. Special features in Adobe Acrobat
5. Creating forms
Total Hours

Hours
0.75
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
12.75

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Assigned reading
F. Problem based activities for skill development
G. Online discussion/chat
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Performance Examinations
F. Comprehension and Skill Assessments
G. Homework Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter about saving PDF files as Microsoft Word documents, extracting PDF
tables as Excel spreadsheets, and exporting PDF content to PowerPoint presentations. Be
prepared to apply your knowledge in the completion of course projects.
2. Read the chapter about converting email messages to PDF documents, converting e-mail,
and automatic archiving. Be prepared to apply your knowledge in the completion of
course projects.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Please introduce yourself to the instructor by writing a two-page introduction using
Microsoft Word or other word processing program. You should include your major at
Butte College, your educational and career goals, the reason for taking this course. You
should answers to the following questions: After taking a look at the course introduction
and expectations, what are you most looking forward to in this course? What plans have
you made, or will you make, to ensure that you are a success in this class? Include specific
details of your plan for course success. Do you have any concerns about this course? If so,
what are they and how can your instructor help you address these concerns?
Now that we have learned how to save documents as PDF files, please save your
document as a PDF document and submit it to the instructor.
2. Given the knowledge you have gained in this course, write a two-page report about how
you envision using Adobe Acrobat in a professional office setting. If you have already
done that, please share how you have used it and what purpose using Adobe Acrobat
served for you and your employer. Please share advantages and any disadvantages you
have experienced in creating, editing and saving documents in PDF format.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Convert a formatted Microsoft Word document to a PDF file using specific Word styles
and headings as shown in Chapter 6. Save, preview, and submit the file to the instructor.
2. Extract a PDF table as a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet by exporting a list from a PDF
document to a new Excel file. Then open the file in Preview to view it.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Adobe Systems, Incorporated. Classroom in a Book: the official training workbook from Adobe
Systems. XI Edition. Adobe Press, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Dorene Thompson
Date: 03/25/2013

