BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 86 - Microsoft Access for Windows
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

2 Unit(s)

This course covers a recent version of Microsoft Access for Windows for students who have an
understanding of computers and desire comprehensive knowledge of relational databases. Course
content includes designing, creating and maintaining databases; importing and exporting data;
modifying and filtering data; creating and using custom forms and reports; and running queries.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Plan, design, and manage databases; insert, move, and delete records and fields; change page
layout; and create relationships between tables.
B. Work with advanced tables, including using design view to create and modify tables; sort
records; and find, replace, import, and export data.
C. Use query techniques, including extracting records using select queries, filtering queries, using a
parameter query, creating self-join queries, creating and using subqueries, and performing
operations using action queries.
D. Set up input masks and field validation, define primary keys and multiple-field primary keys,
create fields to look up values in other tables, and use lookup wizard.
E. Create and use custom forms, use calculated control objects, label and adjust objects, add
graphics and anchoring controls to forms, and sort and find records in forms.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Creating Database Tables
2. Creating Relationships between Database Tables
3. Modifying Tables and Performing Queries
4. Creating Forms, Reports, and Mailing Labels
5. Filtering, Importing, Exporting, and Viewing Data
6. Creating and Using Custom Forms
7. Using Advanced Formulas and Functions
8. Using Spreadsheet Analysis Tools
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Creating Database Tables

Hours
9.00

2. Creating Relationships between Database Tables
3. Modifying Tables and Performing Queries
4. Creating Forms, Reports, and Mailing Labels
5. Filtering, Importing, Exporting, and Viewing Data
6. Creating and Using Custom Forms
7. Using Advanced Formulas and Functions
8. Using Spreadsheet Analysis Tools
Total Hours

9.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter about creating databases and complete the chapter Projects and Skills
Checks.
2. Read the chapter about creating relationships between databases and complete the chapter
Projects and Skills Checks.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write about what you have learned in class related to the Student Learning Objectives
noted in the Course Syllabus. Provide at least one specific example of knowledge or skill
learned for each Student Learning Objective. Be prepared to discuss this assignment in
class.
2. Write about your three favorite features of Microsoft Access, including specifically what
you like about these features and how you will use them in the workplace or in your other
classes. Be prepared to discuss this assignment in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a one-to-one relationship between the Employees table and the Benefits table. Then
display a subdatasheet.
2. Create a lookup field in the Customers table in order to display a drop-down list of values
found in records in the WorkOrders table.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rutkosky, Nita Hewitt. Microsoft Access 2010. 2011 Edition. Benchmark Series, Levels 1 & 2,
EMC Paradigm, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. SNAP package, EMC Paradigm

A. SNAP package, EMC Paradigm

Created/Revised by: Dorene Thompson
Date: 12/03/2012

