BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 81 - Microsoft Excel for Business
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level I
Transfer Status: CSU
12.75 hours Lecture
12.75 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course is designed for those who want to learn Microsoft Excel for Windows from the
perspective of owning or running a business. Course content includes designing and analyzing
worksheets and using formulas and functions with an emphasis on accounting principles.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and demonstrate spreadsheet planning and creation principles
B. Examine and formulate mathematical operations and apply number formats used in accounting
spreadsheets
C. Analyze, interpret, and generate worksheets utilizing formulas and functions for accounting
D. Understand and apply financial statement, depreciation, and loan amortization principles in
designing and creating accounting worksheets
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding and applying worksheet creation principles
2. Using formulas in a worksheet
3. Formatting a worksheet
4. Using financial functions in an accounting worksheet
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
4.00
1.00
6.75
12.75

Lab
Topics
1. Understanding and applying worksheet creation principles
2. Using formulas in a worksheet
3. Formatting a worksheet
4. Using financial functions in an accounting worksheet
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
4.00
1.00
6.75
12.75

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each

hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Class participation
C. Final Examination
D. Performance Examinations
E. Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook about how to create a loan amortization schedule and
complete the case problems in Excel.
2. Read the chapter in the textbook about inserting financial functions and complete the
chapter questions.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using the account balances provided by the instructor, prepare an income statement,
statement of retained earnings, and balance sheet within Excel.
2. Using the Excel file containing financial statements provided by the instructor, perform
vertical analysis on the balance sheet showing each item in proportion to total assets.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using the data file provided by the instructor, create a horizontal analysis on the income
statement.
2. Given the data provided in the case problem for depreciation, create a worksheet using
straight-line depreciation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Owen, Glenn. Excel 2013 for Accounting. 2015 Edition. Cengage Learning, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Accounting Practice Sets
B. Recommended Flash Drive or other storage media

Created/Revised by: Dorene Thompson
Date: 11/17/2014

