BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 85 - Microsoft Excel for Windows
Prerequisite(s): BCIS 18
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course covers a recent version of Microsoft Excel for Windows for students who have an
understanding of computers and desire comprehensive knowledge of spreadsheets. Course content
includes creating, formatting, and maintaining worksheets; using financial formulas and functions;
creating and modifying charts; using visual enhancements; working with templates; working with
tables and data tools; and creating pivot charts.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Create, enhance, edit, save, open, print, and close a Microsoft Excel worksheet.
B. Use financial formulas and functions in creating simple and complex worksheets related to a
business environment.
C. Demonstrate the use of a variety of chart styles; insert, move, size, and delete a chart; edit chart
data series; and change chart design, layout, and location.
D. Add visual interest to worksheets through the use of pictures, clipart, shapes, symbols, special
characters, screenshots, textboxes, watermarks, and diagrams.
E. Apply advanced features and formatting techiques, including conditional formatting, icon sets,
data bars, color scales, custom data filtering, creating and editing pivot charts, and consolidating
data.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Creating and Formatting a Worksheet
2. Using Basic Formulas in a Worksheet
3. Creating and Customizing Charts
4. Using Advanced Formatting Techniques and Templates
5. Sorting and Filtering Data
6. Using Advanced Formulas and Functions
7. Using Spreadsheet Analysis Tools
8. Summarizing and Consolidating Data
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
5.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Creating and Formatting a Worksheet

Hours
6.00

2. Using Basic Formulas in a Worksheet
3. Creating and Customizing Charts
4. Using Advanced Formatting Techniques and Templates
5. Summarizing and Consolidating Data
6. Sorting and Filtering Data
7. Using Advanced Formulas and Functions
8. Using Spreadsheet Analysis Tools
Total Hours

8.00
5.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
8.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter about preparing worksheets and complete the chapter Projects and Skills
Checks.
2. Read the chapter about using formulas and complete the Skills Checks at the end of that
chapter.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write about what you have learned in class related to the Student Learning Objectives
noted in the Course Syllabus. Provide at least one specific example of knowledge or skill
learned for each Student Learning Objective. Be prepared to discuss this assignment in
class.
2. Write about your three favorite features of Microsoft Excel, including specifically what
you like best about these features and how you will use them in the workplace or in your
other classes. Be prepared to discuss this assignment in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a worksheet showing the starting salary of workers at a medical center. Use a
VLOOKUP function to determine starting salary depending on each worker’s education
and years of work experience.
2. Create a worksheet using an If function to calculate a 10% bonus earned by the
salespeople who met their sales quota for the first quarter of this year. Use an absolute cell
reference for the bonus percentage.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rutkosky, Nita Hewitt. Microsoft Excel 2013. 2014 Edition. Benchmark Series, Levels 1 & 2,
EMC Paradigm, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Dorene Thompson
Date: 04/04/2016

