BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 75 - Medical Front Office Procedures
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III and ALH 104
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the unique concepts and skills necessary for successful employment
in a medical office setting. Emphasis is placed on representing the office as the initial patient/public
contact, managing the day-to-day responsibilities, handling patient records, and communicating
clearly and concisely. Discussion is centered around the skills needed to perform effectively,
efficiently, professionally, and ethically in a healthcare setting.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the job opportunities available in today's healthcare management field.
B. Demonstrate the interpersonal skills required for successful face-to-face and telephone
communication.
C. Organize medical records and drug/prescription records using appropriate records management
procedures.
D. Describe the appropriate procedures necessary for processing mail and handling
telecommunications.
E. Identify the office managerial responsibilities required in today's medical front office.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Professional and Career Responsibilities as an Administrative Medical
Assistant
2. Interpersonal Communication Skills for the Medical Office
3. Records Management Procedures for the Medical Office
4. Creating and Managing Correspondence for the Medical Office
5. Health Insurance Systems and Claim Submission
6. Procedural and Diagnostic Coding
7. Office Managerial Responsibilities
Total Hours

Hours
9.00
9.00
12.00
9.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Problem-Solving Sessions

E. Role Playing
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Group Participation
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the information about Medical Records Management on the American Health
Information Management Association (www.ahima.org) website and be prepared to
discuss your findings with the class.
2. Read the handout about the necessity for regulatory compliance in the health care setting.
Be prepared to discuss the information with your class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a one-page paper identify and describe the steps needed for effective verbal and
non-verbal communication in a health care setting.
2. Using the given medical history of a patient and a draft medical report, edit the report for
correct word usage and punctuation. Then create a corrected final copy.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview two medical office managers about the activites each performs in a typical day.
In a two-page paper, summarize the activities. Then discuss whether you feel they
demonstrated the effectiveness, efficiency, professionalism, and ethical behavior needed.
2. Examine the three medical appointment software programs from MedStar, MicroWiz, and
ScheduleView. In a one-page paper, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each. Be
prepared to share your findings with the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fordney, Marilyn. Administrative Medical Assisting. 7th Edition. Thomson Delmar Learning,
2013.
B. Fordney, Marilyn. Workbook to Accompany Administrative Medical Assisting. 7th Edition.
Thomson Delmar Learning, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Sandra Sloan
Date: 10/21/2013

