BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 84 - Basics of Computers
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Ability to key 20 wpm
Transfer Status: CSU
12.5 hours Lecture
12.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course provides students who have limited personal computer experience with the basic
technology skills needed to customize the Windows operating system user interface; manage files,
folders, disks, and drives; operate basic Windows programs; and use basic search features of the
Internet Explorer browser to locate information. The focus of this course is on preparing those
students who are pursuing careers in business environments.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and describe basic terms and concepts used in the Windows Operating System, Windows
Explorer, Internet Explorer, and e-mail programs.
B. Apply the basic features in the Windows Operating System to customize the user interface;
C. Manage file, folder, disk, and drive storage using Windows Explorer;
D. Operate the basic programs installed on the Windows Operating System; and
E. Effectively use basic search features of the Internet Explorer browser to locate information.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Windows Operating System Features
2. Windows Explorer File Management
3. Windows Operating System Programs
4. Internet Explorer Search Features
5. Basics of E-mail features
Total Hours

Hours
2.50
3.00
2.50
2.50
2.00
12.50
Lab

Topics
1. Windows Operating System Features
2. Windows Explorer File Management
3. Windows Operating System Programs
4. Internet Explorer Search Features
5. Basics of E-mail Features
Total Hours

Hours
2.50
3.00
2.50
2.50
2.00
12.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Lab Projects
E. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Conduct online research to locate three relevant articles regarding the last three versions
of the Windows Operating System. Once located, read articles, compile information, and
use the word processing program discussed in class to write a one- to two-page report
summarizing the three articles and cite sources using The Gregg Reference Manual: A
Manual of Style, Grammar, Usage, and Formatting.
2. Read the chapter on the features of the Windows Operating System. At the end of the
chapter, read the questions covering the material. Create a new document using the word
processing program discussed in class and name your document with a meaningful name
and save the file to your USB drive. Create a bold and centered title; then key in the
answers to each question. Use the word processing Numbering feature to apply
numbering to each answer.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using the word processing program discussed in class, create a new document named with
a meaningful name, and saved on your USB drive. Please include the following
information: 1) write a Technology Autobiography describing your computer experiences
up to this point; and 2) explain why you decided to take this course; and what you expect
to learn.
2. After the completion of each textbook chapter, select a minimum of three stated objectives
that are listed at the beginning of the chapter and write an Objective Analysis for each.
Each Objective Analysis should include the following: 1) Selected objectives; and 2)
Written discussion (one or more paragraphs for each objective) of whether you feel that
you have met the objective once the material has been covered. If you feel you have not
met the objective, then please include reason(s) why.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. After the class lecture on the Windows Operating System Features, complete the
end-of-unit exercises. Exercises will need to be completed using a personal computer with
Windows Operating System installed. Once these have been completed, use the online
learning managment system to submit the files that have been saved. Remember, it is very
important to follow directions and name each file correctly.
2. After completing the end-of-unit exercises covering the Windows Operating System
Features, log on to the online learning management system for this course and complete
the 1-hour, open-book, 25-question, multiple choice concepts check. After completing and
submitting the concepts check, your results, which includes the multiple choice questions

that were answered incorrectly, will appear on the screen. You are allowed a second
attempt in order to improve your score.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Johnson, S.. Microsoft® Windows® 8: Illustrated Introductory. 1st Edition. Cengage, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Sandra Sloan
Date: 12/03/2012

