BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 46 - Electronic Calculator (Ten-Key)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
17 hours Lab

2 Unit(s)

In this course, students use the features of an electronic calculator to solve business math problems
including retail calculations, payroll, and installment buying. Students will develop Ten-Key speed
and accuracy using the touch method.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate entering mathematical data with accuracy and speed using the touch method on an
electronic business calculator.
B. Accurately round numbers and estimate answers for multiplication and division problems
without using a business calculator.
C. Solve basic business mathematical problems that include whole numbers, fractions, decimals,
and percents.
D. Compute gross pay, net pay, and taxes and complete payroll registers.
E. Calculate discounts, series discounts, markups, markdowns, and complete invoices.
F. Calculate interest and installment payments.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Ten-Key Touch Method
2.
Multiplication/Division
3.
Percents/Discounts
4.
Retail Calculations/Payroll
5.
Interest/Installment Buying
Total Hours

Hours
7.00
6.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
34.00
Lab

Topics
1.
Ten-Key Touch Method
2.
Multiplication/Division
3.
Percents/Discounts
4.
Retail Calculations/Payroll
5.
Interest/Installment Buying
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Practical Applications
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Lab Projects
B. Homework/Quizzes/Exams
C. Ten-Key Timings
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on completing and verifying inventory cards. In a Word
document in one to two paragraphs, explain what positive balance means in a problem that
includes both plus and minus amounts and then make up a problem that has a negative
balance. Please submit to the instructor at the beginning of the next class session for
review.
2. Read the lesson in the textbook on crossfooting; and in a Word document in one to two
paragraphs, define crossfooting and explain why it is important to use crossfooting to
check your answers. Please submit to instructor at the beginning of the next class session
for review.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a Word document in 1-2 paragraphs, respond to the following: 1) What is a factor? 2)
Why it is important to estimate your answers? and 3) What is a floating decimal on an
electronic calculator? Please submit to the instructor at the beginning of the next class
session for review.
2. Write 1-2 paragraphs in a Word document that explains both the shortcut method for
changing a decimal to a percent, and a short cut method for changing a percent to a
decimal. Submit to the instructor at the beginning of the next class session for review.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. On an electronic calculator, set the Decimal Point Selector at two, the Round switch in the
five/four position, and the Constant Operation mode to “on.” In the lesson on constant
multiplication and division, use the calculator to solve problems 1-64. Run a tape for each
problem. On the tape, write your name, the date, and the lesson number at the top and
number each problem and circle the answer. Transfer answers to the provided answer tab.
Staple the answer tab and tape together, and submit to the instructor at beginning of the
next class session for review.
2. Using an electronic calculator, solve problems 1-50 in the lesson on multiplying three
factors or more. Determine the setting of the Decimal Point Selector by the method
covered in the lesson and class. Run a tape for each problem. On the tape, write your
name, the date, and the lesson number at the top and number each problem and circle the
answer. Transfer answers to the provided answer tab. Staple the answer tab and tape
together, and submit to the instructor at beginning of the next class session for review.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Polinsky, Mildred. Solving Business Problems Using a Calculator. 6th Edition. Glencoe, 2003.
B. Salzman, S., Miller, C. D., & Clendenen, G. Mathematics for Business. 9th Edition. Pearson,
2011.

Created/Revised by: Sandra Sloan
Date: 03/25/2013

