BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 24 - Keyboarding Speed/Accuracy Development
Prerequisite(s): BCIS 20
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course is designed to help students reach an employable typing speed by improving their
keyboarding skills. Emphasis is placed on developing straight copy and production skills with
minimum errors at increased speeds. Keyboarding strengths and weaknesses will be diagnosed,
followed by prescriptive drills to address the issues. Topics include review of alphabet keystroke,
word level, capital letter, alternate-hand, punctuation, number, symbol, and horizontal/vertical
reaches.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate an increase of 10 words per minute on a three-minute timing with no more than
three errors.
B. Identify keyboarding strengths and weaknesses through the use of diagnostic testing materials.
C. Keyboard prescribed corrective drills and practice material to improve weaknesses defined by
the instructor and diagnostic tests.
D. Demonstrate the correct fingering for all letter, number, and manipulative keys using
appropriate "touch" keyboarding techniques.
E. Evaluate all work for accuracy and speed on both short- and long-term tasks.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1.
Pretest/Skills Inventory
2.
Alphabetic Review
3.
Number Review
4.
Skill Builders
5.
Accuracy Builders
6.
Speed Builders
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
15.00
4.00
9.00
9.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Students are expected to participate in instructor-led keyboarding drills designed to develop
good technique, reduce errors, and increase speeds.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration

B. Written Assignments
C. Practical Evaluations
D. Examinations
E. Time writing
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Using the correlated software for the textbook, read the information about your
computer's keypad and proper finger/hand position. Then complete the assigned activities.
2. To diagnose your skill level for speed and accuracy, read and enter up to 342 words in no
more than three minutes.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using internet, newspaper, and/or company fliers, identify the minimum keyboarding
skill required at five different businesses. Compare (1) how your speed compares with
those required by these businesses, (2) what accuracy and speed levels you think
employers will expect you to have, and (3) what additional work you will need to do to
reach your desired goals. Submit your conclusions to your instructor.
2. Create a list of at least 15 technique tips to help you reach faster speeds, increase
accuracy, and improve your comfort at the keyboard. Discuss your list with your
instructor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rieck and Eide, Klemin A. Skillbuilding: Building Speed and Accuracy on the Keyboard. 4th
Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 03/04/2013

