BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 31 - Business Presentation Software
1 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III and ability to key 25 wpm
Transfer Status: CSU
12.75 hours Lecture
12.75 hours Lab
In this course, students will examine the strategies applied when planning, preparing, and creating
business presentations and use features of business presentation software to design and deliver
high-quality presentations. PowerPoint is the primary presentation software to be used in this course;
however, students will be introduced to other presentation software being used in the workplace.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Plan, prepare, and design effective electronic business presentations.
B. Apply features and functions of current presentation softwares to create business presentations.
C. Identify and demonstrate effective presentation delivery skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Plan, prepare, and design effective electronic business presentations
2. Discuss features of presentation software
a) Creating a presentation
b) Formatting and editing slides
c) Inserting elements to enhance and customize the presentation
3. Discuss delivery techniques
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
9.00

1.75
12.75

Lab
Topics
1. Apply features of presentation software
a) Creating a presentation
b) Formatting and editing slides
c) Inserting elements to enhance and customize the presentation
2. Demonstrate effective presentation delivery skills
Total Hours

Hours
10.00

2.75
12.75

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Demonstration
D. Lab Projects
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article about how to present your ideas at work. After reading the article,
complete the online quiz.
2. Read the chapter on Effective Slide Elements (Typography, Color, and Imagery). Using
the slide show printout provided by instructor, examine the elements or groups of
elements that have been applied to the presentation. Writing directly on the printout,
circle and identify the design elements that you see that have been applied. Next to each
design element or group of elements, note if you believe, based on the guidelines in the
chapter, these elements were applied effectively.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Observe three business presentations delivered in class. Using both the design principles
guide and the list of required software features to apply to an electronic business
presentation provided by instructor, write a two- to three-paragraph critique for each
presentation and submit to instructor.
2. Compose an outline for a business presention: After working with instructor to determine a
topic for a business presentation, identify the audience and the purpose of the
presentation, conduct any research needed, and compose an outline of your presentation
using a word processing software. Using your outline, create a "draft" PowerPoint
slideshow using the Outline Tab. Print both the word processing outline and the
PowerPoint outline and submit to instructor for review.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete assigned PowerPoint projects from the chapter regarding Modifying a
Presentation.
2. Complete the online concepts checks covering Modifying a Presentation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Russell, L., & Munter, M. Guide to Presentations. 3rd Edition. Prentice Hall, 2011.
B. Beskin, D. W. Microsoft Office PowerPoint 2010 Illustrated. 1st Edition. Cengage, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Sandra Sloan
Date: 04/01/2013

