BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 47 - Desktop Publishing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

2.5 Unit(s)

In this course, students will examine the design principles and elements applied when creating printed
documents and use desktop publishing software to create high-quality printed business publications
such as newsletters, brochures, and flyers.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define desktop publishing and identify the software used to create printed business publications;
B. Identify the goals of both document design and page design;
C. Identify the design principles and design elements to be considered when planning and creating
business publications;
D. Describe the purpose and function of graphics, color, and typography principles in document
and page design and use both effectively when creating business publications;
E. Describe the features and functions of a current page layout software and apply these to create
business publications;
F. Describe the features and functions of a current photo editing software and apply these to
modify and enhance photos to be placed in business publications; and
G. Plan, create, design, and print business publications applying design principles and elements,
typography principles, color, and images.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Desktop Publishing
2. Goals of Document and Page Design
3. Design Principles of Document and Page Design
4. Design Elements of Document and Page Design
5. Purpose and Function of Graphics, Color, and typography principles in
Document Design
6. Features and Functions of Page Layout Software including creating
textboxes, formatting text and paragraphs, creating objects, placing and
transforming graphics, using Master Pages and Layers, adding interactivity,
and exporting documents
7. Features and Functions of Photo Editing Software including selecting pixels,
altering pixels, using Layers, improving images, and creating special effects
Total Hours

Hours
1.50
1.50
3.00
1.50
3.00
13.00

10.50
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Features and Functions of Page Layout Software including creating
textboxes, formatting text, creating objects, placing and transforming
graphics, using Master Pages and Layers, adding interactivity, and exporting
documents
2. Features and Functions of Photo Editing Software including selecting pixels,
altering pixels, using Layers, improving images, and creating special effects
3. Integrated Desktop Publishing Projects
Total Hours

Hours
10.00

10.00
5.50
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Projects
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on the principles of document design, answer the questions at the end of
the chapter, and be prepared to discuss these principles in the next class session.
2. Read the chapter on the goals of document design, answer the questions at the end of the
chapter, and be prepared to discuss these goals in the next class session.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After selecting a theme for a marketing brochure, compose one to two paragraphs to
include on the inside cover of your brochure that describes the service your company
provides to potential clients. Please type and submit this to instructor for editing and
approval.
2. After selecting a theme for your four-page newsletter, write six different theme-oriented
articles that are approximately 350 words in length. Each article should be typed in a word
processing document and submitted to the instructor for editing and approval to include in
the newsletter.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using the Internet, research "page layout software." Create a document that lists three
different page layout softwares and include a description of each software's features and
cost. Be prepared to discuss and share your findings in class.
2. Analyze the business publications provided by the instructor and determine where the
principles of design have been applied. In a paper, explain how these principles have been
applied and how they improve the appearance and readability of the document or could be
improved upon.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fisher, A.. Adobe InDesign CS6 Illustrated with Online Creative Cloud Updates . 1st Edition.
CENGAGE Learning, 2012.
B. Botello, C.. Adobe® Photoshop® CS6: Illustrated. 1st Edition. CENGAGE Learning, 2012.
C. Williams, R.. The Non-Designer's Design Book: Design and Typographic Principles for the
Visual Novice . 3rd Edition. Peachpit Press, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Sandra Sloan
Date: 11/17/2014

