BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 70L - Introduction to Microsoft Outlook
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: BCIS 20 or ability to key 25 wpm
Transfer Status: CSU
12.75 hours Lecture
12.75 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

In this course, students will be introduced to Microsoft Office Outlook and its use as a Personal
Information Management (PIM) business tool to organize and manage e-mail messages, appointments,
meetings, contacts, and tasks.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Compose professional e-mails following proper e-mail format guidelines, e-mail etiquette, and
business communication guidelines;
B. Identify the Outlook user interface and configure different e-mail accounts;
C. Use features of Outlook's e-mail application to prepare messages, set delivery options, and
specify e-mail security settings;
D. Use features of Outlook's Contacts application to create and manage individual and group
contacts;
E. Use features of Outlook's Calendar application to organize appointments, events, and meeting
requests;
F. Use features of Tasks application to initiate, accept, send, and track projects.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Composing professional e-mails
2. Identifying Outlook user interface and configuring e-mail accounts
3. Preparing e-mail messages, setting delivery options; and specifying e-mail
security settings
4. Creating and managing contacts
5. Creating and organizing appointments, events, and meeting requests
6. Initiating, accepting, sending, and tracking tasks
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.75
2.00
12.75

Lab
Topics
1. Composing professional e-mails
2. Identifying Outlook user interface and configuring e-mail accounts
3. Preparing e-mail messages, setting delivery options; and specifying e-mail
security settings
4. Creating and managing contacts

Hours
2.00
1.00
4.00
2.00

5. Creating and organizing appointments, events, and meeting requests
6. Initiating, accepting, sending, and tracking tasks
Total Hours

2.00
1.75
12.75

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Class Activities
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter about how to set up an all-day event using Outlook. Look online to find a
conference being held by a professional organization in your field, such as IAAP, PASA,
or AMA. Review the details for the conference such as location, lodging, sessions, etc.
Then create an event for an all-day (possibly multi-day) conference in Outlook using the
dates of the conference. Also, in the Calendar Event, include conference location and
schedule sessions you would like to attend, along with any other conference details you
would like to include for your particular conference.
2. Read the chapter regarding how to create meeting requests using Outlook. Create a
meeting request inviting me, the instructor, and three classmates to attend a birthday
celebration for one of our faux co-workers. You should determine date, time, and location.
You should also compose a message in the meeting request that includes a greeting; some
additional creative details about whether to bring gifts, food, etc.; and a complimentary
close.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Compose an e-mail (approximately 3 paragraphs) based on the following workplace
scenario: You are an administrative assistant for a local food pantry. The organization has
decided to alter both the working hours for employees and distribution hours for food. The
food pantry hours will change from 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, to 7:00
a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday. Compose an informational e-mail that will
be sent to all employees. Consider the primary and secondary audiences for this message.
Send e-mail to the instructor for review.
2. Compose an outline draft of an e-mail (approximately 3 paragraphs) responding to the
following workplace scenario: You were just cc’d on an e-mail message sent by a
co-worker to your boss. In the e-mail, the co-worker suggests that a project you two had
been working on together was not completed in a timely manner because you were out
sick one day. Instead of quickly e-mailing a Reply All, you begin the business writing
process by planning your response. Compose an outline/draft of the response. Bring
outline to next class meeting and be prepared to share, discuss, and revise document in
class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. You have just completed your first day of class in BCIS 70L. Your homework assignment
is to go to a Butte College computer lab and configure your student e-mail account to
Outlook using instructions provided by instructor. Once you have configured your

Outlook using instructions provided by instructor. Once you have configured your
account, please complete the following: 1. Take a screen shot of the Outlook user
interface; 2. Create a new e-mail addressed to the email address provided by the instructor
with the Subject Line, "Configure an E-mail Account;" 3. Paste the screen shot in the
body of the e-mail message; and 4. Send the e-mail.
2. After completing the lesson on creating contacts using Outlook, use this feature to create a
contact for each of your classmates using the list of names and student e-mail addresses
provided. Then create a group contact for BCIS 70L that includes all classmates and the
instructor.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Seguin, D.. Microsoft Outlook 2010. Paradigm, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Sandra Sloan
Date: 03/25/2013

