BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BCIS 33 - Skills for the Working Professional
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to identifying essential external and internal communication skills,
managing conflict, developing a positive attitude, and creating the professional image for the
workplace.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Examine the components of external and internal communication skills.
B. Demonstrate the effective verbal and non-verbal skills required for managing conflict.
C. Evaluate the techniques for developing a positive attitude.
D. Assess the interpersonal and self-management skills necessary for creating a professional image
for the workplace.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Identifying Essential External and Internal Communication Skills
2. Managing Conflict
3. Developing A Positive Attitude
4. Creating the Professional Image for the Workplace
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments

1. Read the article titled "The Resilience Factor." Complete the quiz to determine how good
you are at regulating your emotions and staying calm under pressure. Be prepared to
discuss your results with your group.
2. Read the article titled "Five Conflict Resolution Styles." Given five different conflict
situations, identify which style would be the most appropriate to use in each one. Be
prepared to discuss your answers with your class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Successful companies often hire employees for attitude and train for skills. First, write a
1-2 page paper about the qualities of someone you know who consistently has a good
attitude; then describe an experience you have had working with a person who had a
negative attitude.
2. In a job interview, it is not good enough to simply say "I am an excellent team player."
You must be able to offer examples. Write a 1-2 page paper about one of your team
experiences and be prepared to share it with your group.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Record all activities performed in 15-minute intervals over a three-day period. Write a 3-5
page evalulation paper about how you spent your time and what changes you would make
to create your ideal time management strategy.
2. Spend half an hour with your group in a public place such as a library, coffee shop, or
student cafeteria. Observe the people around you and write down the different kinds of
nonverbal communication that take place. Be prepared to share your groups observations
with the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Masters, L. A., Wallace, H.. Personal Development for Life and Work. 10th Edition.
South-Western/Cengage Learning, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. From Backpack to Briefcase--Helping Students Transition to and thrive in Today's Workplace, a
guide for California Community College Instructors, Chancellor's Office, California Community
Colleges, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Connie Petlack
Date: 04/01/2013

