BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BIOL 20 - Human Anatomy
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

4 Unit(s)

Structural organization of the human body: gross and microscopic structure of the integumentary,
skeletal, muscular, nervous, sensory, endocrine, cardiovascular, lymphatic, respiratory, digestive,
excretory, and reproductive systems, from cellular to organ system levels of organization. This course
is primarily intended for nursing, allied health, kinesiology, and other health related majors. (C-ID
BIOL 110B).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe key structural features of different human cell and major tissue types.
B. Identify and describe the anatomy of the systems of the human body.
C. Relate structure and function at the cellular through system levels of organization of human
body systems.
D. Describe structural or anatomical changes that occur in disease, injury or aging of the human
body systems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Cellular structures
2. Histology
3. Embryology
4. Integumentary system
5. Skeletal system
6. Muscular system
7. Surface (External) Anatomy
8. Nervous system including special senses (sensory organs)
9. Endocrine system
10. Cardiovascular system
11. Lymphatic system
12. Respiratory system
13. Urinary system
14. Digestive system
15. Reproductive system
16. Comparison of normal versus diseased, injured or age-related structural

Hours
3.50
3.00
1.00
1.50
4.50
4.50
1.00
6.00
1.00
5.00
1.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
3.00

16. Comparison of normal versus diseased, injured or age-related structural
changes in any or all of the above organ systems.
Total Hours

3.00
51.00

Lab
Topics
1. Identification of microscopic structures and tissues.
2. Identification of bones and bone features.
3. Identification of skeletal musculature and muscle features.
4. Identification of internal organs.
5. Dissection of organs or observation of dissected organs.
6. Dissection of organisms or observation of dissected organisms.
7. Identification of structures on models.
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
10.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
3.00
13.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Reading Assignments
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Laboratory Study: The lab emphasizes hands-on experience with anatomical models and charts,
as well as preserved materials, including a dissected human cadaver.
F. Homework: Students are expected to complete a minimum of eight hours per week of
outside-of-class homework activities (two hours per unit).
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Lecture Exams and Quizzes: These include written responses that require students to describe
and explain class information.
C. Laboratory Practical Exams and Quizzes: These require accurately spelled responses recalled
from memory.
D. Writing Requirement: The 1500 word writing requirement will be satisfied by the writing
necessary on exams and other written assignments at the discretion of the instructor.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter of your text (Tissues) and be prepared for an in class discussion of the
following classes of tissues:
a. Epithelial
b. Connective
c. Muscle
d. Nervous
2. Read the Clinical Note regarding Skin Disorders in Chapter 4 of your text (The
Integumentary System) and be prepared for an in class discussion of the effects of
prolonged exposure to sunlight.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write 2-3 paragraphs detailing the structure and function of the nephron during an in class
assessment.

2. Write 2-3 paragraphs detailing the abundance, characteristics and functions of the
different classes of leukocytes during an in class assessment.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Take home a diagram of the heart, label each structure, and then provide a brief
description of the labeled structures.
2. Take home a diagram of the cranial nerves, label each nerve, and then provide a brief
function of each nerve.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Martini, Timmons and Tallitsch. Human Anatomy. 8th Edition. Pearson Benjamin-Cummings,
2014.
B. Fugle, G. and K. White. Human Anatomy Laboratory Guide. Butte College Publishing, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. "Biology 20 - Resources for Lab Study." An online Butte College website containing various
tutorial projects for review of laboratory materials. The site is available to all students enrolled
in Biology 20 at Butte College:
B. Human anatomical models and charts, preserved human cadaver and organ specimens and fetal
pigs for students dissection.

Created/Revised by: Gary Lechner
Date: 04/27/2015

