BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BIOL 9 - Current Issues in Biology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the understanding of basic biological principles and how each of
these principles affects daily human life. Biological principles include the scientific method,
biological macromolecules, cell structure and function, cell division, genetics, DNA structure and
function, metabolism, evolution, and ecology. Issues covered include nutrition, stem cell research,
cancer, genetic diseases, cloning, genetic engineering, gene therapy, ecological diversity, invasive
species, sustainability, and the impact of humans on the environment.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Design and conduct an experiment utilizing the scientific method. Identify characteristics that
differentiate science as a distinctive way of knowing.
B. Identify the structure and function of biologically important macromolecules and describe the
role of macromolecules in the nutrition of the human population.
C. Explain how each cellular structure affects cellular function and discuss the problems resulting
from flawed cellular structure and function.
D. Solve inheritance problems, including calculations of genotype and phenotype ratios of
offspring.
E. Describe the structure and function of DNA (including DNA replication and Protein Synthesis)
and discuss recent discoveries related to DNA structure and function.
F. Explain the mechanism of natural selection and the genetic basis of evolution. Apply this
understanding to classic and current examples of evolution.
G. Define sustainability, illustrate examples of sustainable practices, and discuss the impact of
humans on ecosystems.
H. Compare and contrast the processes of photosynthesis and respiration and discuss how these
metabolic pathways contribute to global biogeochemical cycles and energy flow.
I. Discuss sensitive topics (such as stem cell research and genetic engineering) from an informed
position using scientific evidence.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Scientific Method: The process of the scientific method and the completion
of a small individual research project. Proper data collection and
presentation.
2. Macromolecules: Structure and function of carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic
acids, and proteins.
3. Macromolecules: Role of lipids, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and proteins
in human health.
4. The Cell: Structure and function of organelles in cellular processes.

Hours
5.00

4.00
2.00
3.00

5. Cell Division: cell division, the cell cycle, and cancer.
6. Genetics: Mendelian genetics, pedigrees, genetic disorders.
7. DNA Structure and Function: DNA replication and protein synthesis.
8. Biotechnology: Stem cells, cloning, genetic engineering, gene therapy.
9. Metabolism: Photosynthesis and respiration.
10. Ecosystems: Nutrient cycles and food webs; importance of biodiversity.
11. Evolutionary principles: Natural selection, and the role of DNA in
evolution.
12. Evolution: Microevolution, and speciation.
13. Ecology: The biosphere, growth of populations, interaction among
organisms.
14. Ecology: Sustainability, the role of humans in the environment.
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Individual Research Project
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Written Assignments
E. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about mitosis and meiosis in the textbook and the online links listed in the “web
links” document. Describe the steps of each process as shown in the table provided by the
instructor. Write a paragraph comparing and contrasting mitosis and meiosis.
2. Read about stem cells in the textbook and online links listed in the “web links” document.
Write a 300 word paragraph describing the processes of cell replacement therapy and
Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer. Be prepared to discuss the differences between therapeutic
and reproductive cloning.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research the health concerns related to trans fats and write a 300 word paragraph
summarizing your findings. One potential solution is to ban trans fats. Write a paragraph
outlining the pros and cons of such a ban and your position on this idea. Be sure to use
evidence to back up your position.
2. Go to: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics. Pick one of the cancer types listed and read
the information provided. Write a 300 word paragraph summarizing your findings.
Include: risk factors, diagnosis, treatments, and other relevant information.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct a small research project regarding how distractions affect short term memory.

Explain your experimental design and conclusions to the class (be sure to include control
and test groups; dependent, independent, and control variable). Discuss how your
experiment could be improved and comment on the experimental design of other students.
2. Visit a public park. Analyze the following characteristics of the park: plant and animal
diversity; soil type; abiotic resources; and visible or likely examples of mutualism,
commensalism, parasitism, and competition. Write a 2 page summary of your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cain, Damman, Lue, Yoon. Discover Biology. 5th Edition. Norton, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Journal articles and online resources

Created/Revised by: Suzanne Wakim
Date: 04/27/2015

