BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BIOL 13 - Cell and Molecular Biology
5 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1 and Math Level V
Recommended Prep: BIOL 11 or BIOL 12 and Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture
102 hours Lab
This course is an introductory study of procaryotic and eucaryotic cell structure and function as well as
basic viral structure and reproduction. Attention is given to life processes within cells and to
interactions between cells. Coverage includes experimental design and statistical analysis; basic
biotechnology concepts and techniques; DNA structure, function and gene expression; enzyme
function; energetics; nutrient cycles in ecosystems; transport mechanisms; cytoskeletal components;
cell communication (including nerve impulse conduction and signal transduction); cell reproduction;
Mendelian and population genetics; cell evolution; and modern concepts of molecular biology. This
course is designed for biology majors. Offered Spring only. (C-ID BIOL 190).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe key cell processes (including metabolism and cellular interactions) and explain how
the chemical properties of molecules relate to these processes.
B. Compare and Contrast procaryotic cells, eucaryotic cells, viruses and prions.
C. Design and execute a simple biological experiment which includes: research of primary sources;
appropriate tests with controls and appropriate blinding; analyzing data; and presenting findings
as a scientific report with appropriate formatting and graphs.
D. Apply knowledge previously gained to analyze problems in cell biology previously not
experienced by the student.
E. Use basic cell biology laboratory equipment and methods including: a spectrophotometer,
micropipettes, thermal cycler, computer-based data acquisition equipment; vertical and
horizontal gel electrophoresis, column chromatography, microscopy and aseptic technique.
F. Perform calculations used in laboratory work and genetics.
G. Explain concepts in biotechnology and current research.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Chemistry of life. CHNOPS, lipids, nucleotides, amino acids, and
carbohydrates.
2. Metabolism. Enzymes, respiration, photosynthesis, fermentation, and
nutrient cycles.
3. Cell Diversity and Evolution.
4. Viruses, viral repliation, viroids, prions.
5. Cell Cycle. Role of the cytoskeleton and enzymatic regulationin mitosis
and meiosis.
6. Mendelian genetics and gene mapping.

Hours
8.00
9.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00

6. Mendelian genetics and gene mapping.
7. DNA replication, telomeres, PCR, DNA sequencing.
8. Protein Synthesis. Reading the genetic code, regulation of protein
synthesis, post-transcriptional and post-translational modifications,
mutations.
9. Biotechnology. Genetic Engineering, Microarrays, etc.
10. Nerve conduction. Membrane structure and transport.
11. Immune system. Intercellular signaling, role of antibodies and cell types.
12. Intracellular signaling.
13. Movement. Role of cytoskeleton in the movement of muscles, flagella, and
cilia.
14. Key historical events in the study of cell biology
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
9.00

4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
51.00

Lab
Topics
1.
Scientific Method
2.
Lab Techniques and Statistics
3.
Testing for Macromolecues
4.
DNA isolation and Gel Electrophoresis
5.
Protein Quantification and Sequencing
6.
Membranes
7.
Aseptic technique
8.
Enzyme Kinetics
9.
Fermentation
10. Photosynthesis
11. Nitrogen Cycle
12. Microscope use and measurements
13. Bacterial Metabolism
14. Staining Cell Structures
15. Viruses
16. Cell Division
17. Genetic Variation and Natural Selection
18. Mutations
19. DNA Sequencing and Fingerprinting
20. Plasmid Mapping
21. Bacterial Transformation
22. Plant Tissue Culture
23. Protein Isolation and Vertical Gels
24. Movement
25. Neurons
26. ELISA and Epidemiology
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
102.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Laboratory Experiments
G. Text and Outside Reading (including primary research)
H. Independent Research Project
I. Homework Exercises, Practice Problems and Review Questions
J. Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class
homework for each course unit
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Homework
F. Lab Projects
G. Practical Evaluations
H. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on cell structure in your textbook and organize the presented information
in a table. The table should include: 1) each cell structure discussed; 2) the biochemical
composition of each structure; 3) the function of each structure; 4) the location of each
structure in the cell.
2. Read the exercise in the lab manual on membrane properties and create a flowchart that
summarizes what you will do in lab. The flowchart should be detailed enough such that
you would only need it, and not your lab manual, in lab to be able to perform the
experiment.
B. Writing Assignments
1. For the Chromosomal Preparation from Bacterial Cells laboratory exercise, make an entry
in your lab notebook that includes the following: 1) a statement of purpose for the lab; 2)
a flowchart or diagram that describes the procedures to be followed for the lab exercise;
3) a results section in which you record your data in tabular form using proper scientific
formatting; and 4) a discussion section in which your summarize your findings and
describe what they mean.
2. Choose a primary research article that will provide background for your group research
projects. Read the article and write a 3 page summary that includes the following: 1) a
statement describing the question(s) being asked by the researchers; 2) a summary of the
background information provided that puts this question in context, i.e. why is it
important that this question be answered? 3) A description of the experimental design(s);
4) A summary of the findings and how this advances our understanding of the topic at
hand.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In groups of 2, find a current (within 6 months) news topic relating to cellular and
molecular biology. Prepare an overhead presentation of 5 slides that summarizes the
research findings and describe how this relates to material you have learned in this class.

2. In groups of no more than 4, design a research project to be conducted during the semester
and write a 5 page project proposal for the project. The proposal should include: 1) Your
research question (s) clearly stated; 2)an explanation of why this question is important to
study; 3) The null hypothesis, and the alternative hypothesis; 4) Your experimental
outline, and an explanation of how this answers your question; 5) What variables you will
be measuring and how often you will measure them. Include dependent, and independent
variables, control and test group(s), and Indicate how many replicates you will perform;
and 6) a timeline of your proposed experiment, indicating what will be done when, to
complete the project by the end of the semester.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Raven, P., et. al. Biology. 10th Edition. McGraw Hill, 2014.
B. White, A. Biology 13 Unit Pack. Butte College Press, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Other supportive material to be provided by instructor or library or course web site.
B. Scientific Calculator
C. goggles and lab coat

Created/Revised by: Andrea White
Date: 12/07/2015

