BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 99 - Work Experience-BUS
Prerequisite(s): Permission of Cooperative Work Experience
Education instructor and employment supervisor
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
60 - 600 hours Work Experience

1 - 8 Unit(s)

Career Work Experience (CWE) is a course that gives students the opportunity to earn
both a grade and units for what they learn on the job related to their vocational major
while gaining practical work experience. Students may earn one semester unit of
college credit in this course for every sixty hours of unpaid work experience (60-480
hours unpaid) or seventy-five hours of paid work experience (75-600 hours paid).
Students may earn a maximum of sixteen units for all types of Work Experience.
Students may enroll in this course up to 16 unit(s) to complete the entire curriculum of
the course.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify CWE objectives that are unique to each student and employment situation
in consultation with their employer and CWE instructor prior to enrollment.
B. Describe the importance of on-the-job responsibilities.
C. Identify the attitudes and knowledge elements necessary for success.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Work Experience
Topics
1. Writing measurable objectives
2. Work and skill orientation while working with a supervisor
3.
Individual skill development
4. Self evaluation
5. Recording attendance and the value of time management
Total Hours

Hours
4.00 - 4.00
10.00 - 40.00
40.00 542.00
2.00 - 4.00
4.00 - 10.00
60 - 600

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. General methods of instruction will vary with each student and employer, but will
usually rely on "hands on," on-the-job training as the primary method of
instruction.
B. Procedures for enrolling in Career Work Experience.
1. Contact the Job Placement and Cooperative Education Office to obtain an
enrollment packet or download from the Job Placement and Cooperative
Education website.
2. Fill out the Application for Career Work Experience, and the Cooperative
Work Experience Student Agreement.
3. With assistance of the employer and instructor, write specific, measurable
learning objectives to be met during the semester and enter them onto the
Objective/Evaluation sheet including signatures from student, employer and
instructor.
4. Return the completed packet to the Job Placement and Cooperative Education
Office to obtain a control number.
5. Promptly enroll in class at Admissions and Records.
C. Students' Responsibilities.
1. Fill out the Objective/Evaluation sheet in consultation with the instructor and
employer. The agreement needs to be signed by student, employer and instructor.
2. Become properly registered in the Career Work Experience course.
3. During the work experience, keep a record of attendance at work on the yellow
Employer's Report of Student Attendance form. At the conclusion of this course
have this form signed by your supervisor to verify its accuracy and submit to the
Job Placement and Cooperative Education Office.
D. Work Experience Instructor.
1. Will arrange for work site visitation, course grading and submission of
appropriate paperwork and forms necessary to completing the course.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Students may earn one semester unit of college credit in this course for every
sixty hours of non-paid work experience and seventy-five hours of paid work
experience. Students may earn from 1 to 8 units in a semester.
B. Grading: An assessment will be made by the Work Experience Instructor in
consultation with the student and their supervisor regarding the student's ability to
achieve the objectives noted on the Objective/Evaluation sheet submitted at the
beginning of the course.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Learning objectives and assignments are assigned by the instructor who is
supervising each individual student’s internship or other workplace
experience. Each student’s assignments and learning objectives are unique
to their own experience and education and dependent on the employer’s
ability to provide new learning opportunities.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Learning objectives and assignments are assigned by the instructor who is
supervising each individual student’s internship or other workplace

experience. Each student’s assignments and learning objectives are unique
to their own experience and education and dependent on the employer’s
ability to provide new learning opportunities.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Learning objectives and assignments are assigned by the instructor who is
supervising each individual student’s internship or other workplace
experience. Each student’s assignments and learning objectives are unique
to their own experience and education and dependent on the employer’s
ability to provide new learning opportunities.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Materials of instruction will depend upon the type of job obtained by the student.

Created/Revised by: Jo Anna Birdsall
Date: 09/26/2016

