BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 18 - Database Design
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

4 Unit(s)

This course is a study of fundamental database design principles and techniques, including data
modeling with Entity-Relationship Diagrams (ERD) and the normalization process. Topics include the
relational data model, managing data using Structured Query Language (SQL), database management
system (DBMS) architecture and operation, and database security mechanisms. Students will apply
core concepts and techniques to practical business scenarios.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the characteristics of the relational data model in the context of modern
relational DBMS.
B. Design a database using ERD and apply the normalization process to ensure proper organization
of data.
C. Use SQL to manage data in a relational DBMS.
D. Analyze the architecture and functionality of a modern relational DBMS.
E. Analyze and compare the capabilities of various commercial DBMS products for large- and
small-scale databases.
F. Identify and describe the responsibilities of a database administrator, including system security,
database integrity, system maintenance and operation, and performance evaluation.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to DBMS
2. Relational Data Model (Terminology, Characteristics, Operations)
3. Database Design: Entity-Relationship Approach
4. Normalization Procedures
5. Logical Schema (Entities, Relationships, Attributes, Keys, Implementation
of Relationships)
6. SQL
7. DBMS Architecture and Operation
8. Database Project Implementation
9. Relational Operations; Database Views
10. Database Administration Issues; Responsibilities of the Datbase
Administrator (DBA)
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
12.00
3.00
9.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

Lab
Topics
1. Relational Data Model (Terminology, Characteristics, Operations)
2. Database Design: Entity-Relationship Approach
3. Normalization Procedures
4. Logical Schema (Entities, Relationships, Attributes, Keys, Implementation
of Relationships)
5. SQL
6. Design Standards and Flaws
7. Database Project Implementation
8. Relational Operations; Database Views
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
18.00
3.00
15.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Class participation
E. Lab Projects
F. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the "Database Design Guidelines" section of your book and come to class prepared
to discuss the guidelines pertaining to primary keys and attributes.
2. Read the "Quick Start" section of the "SQL*Plus User's Guide and Reference," and be
prepared to demonstrate for the instructor your ability to launch the SQL*Plus
command-line client and connect to a specific database.
B. Writing Assignments
1. List and briefly describe each of the six fundamental rules for building a relational
database. Print and submit your work to the instructor at the next class meeting.
2. Write a short (1-2 pages) paper to present a comprehensive description of the execution of
an SQL command. Your description should include the client, server, and network
activities associated with the execution of an SQL command.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Do research on the Internet to identify a minimum of three applications that can be used to
create Entity-Relationship Diagrams. Submit a brief analysis of the three applications you
select, including the vendor, advantages, disadvantages, and pricing/licensing.

2. Create and submit to the instructor an ERD and attribute listing (please identify all
primary keys) for the hypothetical retail store database design problem provided in class
by the instructor.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lees, S., Mensching, J., & Tidwell, A.. Database Management: The Foundation of Management
Information Systems. 19th Edition. Knowledge Transfer Systems, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Online reference materials as assigned by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/30/2012

