BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 44 - Human Resource Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course highlights complex and important issues in current human resources practice, and
demonstrates how managers can effectively manage human resources. The course explores Human
Resource Management (HRM) issues for today's companies: changing government and legal
requirements; new information systems; downsizing; demands for a more skilled workforce;
increasing attention to and appreciation for diversity; the global workforce and intensifying global
competition; and changing cultural and economic factors.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain and apply terms, specific facts and theories relating to the HRM function of
organizations today.
B. Engage in informed discussion about important issues relating to equal employment
opportunity, affirmative action and diversity, describing the benefits and components of an
effective diversity program.
C. Identify and compare the various approaches to employee compensation, training and
development, and appraisal, discussing the relative advantages and disadvantages of each.
D. Demonstrate via oral and written case analysis appropriate insights and recommendations
regarding written and/or videotaped case scenarios depicting major HRM issues and problems.
E. Identify, explain and apply federal and state compliance requirements relating to HRM.
F. Discuss and develop strategies for using the HRM function to promote an organization's success,
particularly by maximizing employee productivity and motivation.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Challenge of Human Resources Management
2. Strategy and Human Resources Planning
3. Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) and HRM
4. Job Analysis and Design
5. Expanding the Talent Pool: Recruitment and Careers
6. Employee Selection
7. Training and Development
8. Performance Management and the Employee Appraisal Process
9. Managing Compensation
10. Pay-for-Performance: Incentive Rewards
11. Employee Benefits

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
2.50

12. Promoting Safety and Health
13. Employee Rights and Discipline
14. The Dynamics of Labor Relations
15. International HRM
16. Creating High-Performance Work Systems
Total Hours

4.00
4.50
3.00
2.50
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Case Analysis
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Projects
F. Homework
G. Case analysis
H. Non-job interviews
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material about federal and state regulations pertaining to human resources
management (HRM). Prepare for in-class discussion of these compliance requirements,
including their application to relevant case scenarios.
2. Read the text material on Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO), affirmative action and
the diversity of the workforce. Prepare for an in-class discussion of these topics,
particularly as they relate to enhancing organizational effectiveness.
B. Writing Assignments
1. For a particular position, develop 10-15 interview questions to be asked of candidates –
and a scoring sheet to be used by interviewers in the interview process. Since you’re
committed to providing candidates with a realistic job preview, generate a list of questions
you’d expect applicants to ask and the honest responses you’d provide them about this
position.
2. For a specific entry-level, professional position, write a job description and job
specification that will be used for recruitment purposes. Also, identify the supporting
documents that prospective applicants must submit for consideration. Then, generate your
recruiting/selection plan, being specific regarding tasks, resources and timeframes. Your
submission for this assignment will be approximately 5 pages long.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. As a team, you have been charged with making plans to address your hypothetical
mid-sized firm’s HR challenges. Describe the organization in terms of its characteristics.

Create a brief SWOT analysis for your organization. Identify key employees (or employee
categories) needed to facilitate your organization’s goal attainment – and, for each,
his/her/their core competencies. Devise an organizational staffing strategy, using strategic
knowledge workers, core employees, supporting labor and alliance partners, as
appropriate. This report should be approximately 5 pages in length.
2. Imagine that you are the newly-hired administrator of a mid-sized non-profit organization.
Your employees’ performance is less than optimal and employees have never been
formally evaluated. Create an organization chart showing the hierarchy of the non-profit
and indicating the job titles of personnel. Then, design and describe a 360-degree appraisal
process you will implement. Generate forms and procedures to support this process. This
report should be approximately 8 pages in length.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Snell, S.A. and Bohlander, G.W.. Managing Human Resources . 16th Edition. Thompson
Southwestern, 2013.
B. Mathis, R.L. and Jackson, J.H.. Human Resource Management. 14th Edition. Cengage Learning,
2013.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

