BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 29 - Supervising Employees
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course helps students (both supervisors and prospective supervisors) develop insights about how
to enhance performance in today’s changing workplace. Topics pertain to decision-making,
communication, motivation, organizational change and innovation. The focus is on self-assessment,
analyzing and understanding work situations, and developing personal supervisory skills and
strategies.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify ways in which today’s global work environment is diverse, and describe ways in which
employees in particular demographic groups may be characterized in terms of their goals, values
and customs.
B. Devise strategies for using decision-making techniques contingent on an organization’s needs.
C. Explain the importance of effective communication (including listening) in work situations and
describe methods for communicating effectively.
D. Develop a variety of tools for effectively motivating employees, using job design, coaching,
goal-setting, rewards and equitable supervisory practices.
E. Describe ways in which organizations create atmospheres that encourage innovation and
change.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Supervision in a Changing Workplace
2. Maing Sound and Creative Decisions
3. Improving Communication Skills
4. Motivating Today's Employees
5. Managing Change and Innovation
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion

F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material relating to decision-making in organizations. Prepare for in-class
discussion of whether the same general approach should be making by individuals making
personal decisions and organizations making business decisions.
2. Read the text material pertaining to communication skills, in particular reflecting on and
identifying your own communication style. Prepare for in-class discussion of each of the
identified communication styles, its advantages and disadvantages.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Describe a situation from a current or recent job that relates to your “Making Sound and
Creative Decisions.” Based on your reading of relevant text information, comment on
how effectively the situation was handled. Also, make recommendations as to how a
similar situation might be handled more effectively in the future. Please write this three- to
four-page report in a way that protects the confidentiality of the organization and
individuals involved.
2. Read the brief case scenario provided by your instructor that describes an organization
that currently fails to effectively motivate its employees. Brainstorm ways in which
supervisors might motivate employees via job design, goals setting, rewards and
supervisory practices and, using the format provided, present your ideas in a two- to
three-page paper.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct research on the Internet investigating the topics of diverse goals, values and/or
customs among workers in the USA or abroad. For example, investigate goals, values
and/or customs that vary from one country to another. Or consider goals, values and/or
customs that are unique to a particular demographic group (e.g., based on age, gender,
religion, ethnic group, areas of the country). Write a five page paper (using APA citation
format) to present and discuss what you have found. Reflect on the impact of your
findings on managers in today’s organizations.
2. Complete the Skill Building Applications Incidents at the end of the chapter pertaining to
“Encouraging Innovation and Change,” answering the questions posed after each with two
to three descriptive sentences. Be prepared for discussion of your responses, including
your rationale.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Sergiovanni, R., Starratt, R. and Cho, V.. Supervision: A Redefinition. 9th Edition.
McGraw-Hill Publishing, 2013.
B. Rue, L.R. & Byars, L.. Supervision: Key Link to Productivity. 10th Edition. McGraw-Hill
Publishing, 2010.
C. Certo, S.. Supervision: Concepts and Skill-Building. 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill Publishing,

2012.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/29/2013

