BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 25 - Small Business Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers the practical considerations, challenges and rewards associated with starting and
operating a small business. The course explores how to identify small business opportunities; the
factors influencing entrepreneurial success; and financing, marketing, managing, record-keeping and
computer applications to support small business operations. Each student will identify a business
opportunity, then create a detailed business plan.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the role of small businesses in today's global economy.
B. Evaluate his or her potential as an entrepreneur, based on completion of assigned
self-assessments.
C. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of the various ways to become an entrepreneur:
small business start-up, buying an existing business or becoming a franchisee.
D. Assess business opportunities (using tools such as financial and competitive analysis) to
determine their feasibility and potential.
E. Identify and discuss operations essential to small business success: marketing, managing human
resources, purchasing and inventory, financial controls, legal compliance and information
management.
F. Conduct small business marketing research, using primary and secondary resources.
G. Write a comprehensive business plan that provides an organized overview of the venture and
identifies key business strategies and tactics.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Small Business: An Overview
2. Small Business Management, Entrepreneurship and Ownership
3. Social Responsibility, Ethics and Strategic Planning
4. The Business Plan
5. Forms of Business Organizations
6. Franchising and Taking Over Existing Businesses
7. Starting a New Business
8. Accounting Records and Financial Statements
9. Small Business Finance
10. The Legal Environment: Business Law and Government Regulation
11. Small Business Marketing: Strategy and Research

Hours
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00

12. Marketing Mix: Product
13. Marketing Mix: Place
14. Marketing Mix: Price
15. Marketing Mix: Promotion
16. Human Resource Management
Total Hours

3.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Business Plan
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material about sources of finance for entrepreneurs. Prepare for in-class
discussion of the availability, advantages and disadvantages of each.
2. Read the text material about ethics and strategic planning for entrepreneurs. Prepare for
in-class discussion of some case scenarios typically faced by small business people. Be
prepared to indicate what you would do and why.
B. Writing Assignments
1. For your small business idea, begin preliminary work on your marketing plan (8-10 page
total). Indicate and describe your target audience(s). For each:
- identify its buying criteria;
- specify your strategy for gathering primary and secondary data as to the market's needs
and wants; and
- describe your marketing mix.
2. Honestly assess yourself relative the traits/skills of successful entrepreneurs, then write a
3-5 page report showcasing your competencies, identifying your weaknesses and
indicating your improvement plan.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. For your small business idea, create a formal, comprehensive 15-20 page business plan
and Powerpoint presentation, following the format provided by your instructor. Your
report and presentation will be assessed in terms of their organization, comprehensiveness
(in terms of both scope and depth), effective communication and feasibility.
2. Evaluate four prospective franchise opportunities in terms of factors such as:
- franchisor reputation;

- start-up costs;
- ongoing franchise fees;
- potential return-on-investment; and
- the nature of ongoing operational support provided to franchisees.
Write-up your findings in business 5-8 page report format.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hatten, Timothy S.. Small Business Management: Entrepreneurship &. 5th Edition. Cengage,
2012.
B. Scarborough, Norman M.. Effective Small Business Management. 10th Edition. Prentice-Hall,
2012.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

