BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 8 - Legal Environment of Business
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers fundamental legal principles pertaining to business transactions and affecting
managerial decisions. It introduces the law as an instrument of social and political control in society.
Topics include sources of law and ethics, contracts, torts, agency, judicial and administrative
processes, employment law, forms of business organizations, and domestic and international
governmental regulations. (C-ID BUS 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze cases using the IRAC method (Issue, Rule, Analysis, Conclusion). Identify issues and
apply the appropriate legal rules to the fact patterns to reach defensible legal conclusions.
B. Perform legal research, to include evaluating and interpreting a court citation and locating a
court case on an assigned topic.
C. Compare and contrast the theories of jurisprudence and the classifications of law.
D. Categorize the types of government agencies, powers and functions, controls through
congressional action, executive action, and the courts.
E. Differentiate the relationship between state and federal systems, jurisdiction of courts, the
interaction between business managers and lawyers, and the importance of alternate dispute
resolution methods.
F. Demonstrate how cases progress through the court system from problem, to filing, to trial, and
appeal.
G. Describe the constitutional basis for federal government regulation of business, including limits
of government power.
H. Appraise the relationship between law and ethics.
I. Describe the various agency relationships and the duties and liabilities of agents and principals
as the foundation of partnerships and corporations.
J. Distinguish between torts and crimes and describe the purpose of criminal and tort law.
K. Evaluate when a promise is enforceable, the elements of a contract, performance, and remedies
available in the event of breach.
L. Distinguish between contracts governed by the Uniform Commercial Code and those governed
by the common law of contracts.
M. Explain a corporation’s legal structure and differentiate it from other forms of business
organization, the meaning of limited liability for the owners; describe the relationship of the
various stakeholders.
N. Describe the major federal acts that pertain to antitrust, securities regulation, employment law,
and environmental law.
O. Compare and contrast state and federal regulation.
P. Differentiate between the application of domestic and international legal principles.
Q. Evaluate and develop effective strategies for reducing potential enterprise liability in the areas of
tort law, products and service liability, respondent superior, etc.
R. Identify the scope and methodology of governmental authority to regulate private business
activity and assess the effect of constitutional limitations on that authority.
S. Distinguish and compare alternative methods and procedures for resolving business related

S. Distinguish and compare alternative methods and procedures for resolving business related
disputes, including traditional civil lawsuits, small claims, arbitration, administrative hearings,
etc.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Definition of law. Classications (equity, common law, etc.). Sources of and
reasons for law. Administrative agencies, rule making, enforcement,
adjudication, due process.
2. State and federal court systems, jurisdiction, methods for alternate dispute
resolution.
3. Progress of a case through the court system. The role of judge, jury,
lawyers and the parties. The appellate process, types of motions, rulings,
judgments and enforcement of judgments.
4. Law and ethics, corporate social responsibility, stakeholder relationships
5. Torts distinguished from crimes, intentional torts, negligence, business torts,
strict liability, tort reform proposals, criminal law and business.
6. Contracts, classification, contract terms and elements, performance,
enforcement, breach and remedies.
7. Creation of an agency relationship, duties of agents, principals, liabilities
(tort and contract) of principals, agents.
8. Sole proprietorships, partnerships, limited partnerships, and limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, corporations, corporate structure
and governance.
9. Application of the U.S. Constitution to business activities
10. Laws governing business behavior, including antitrust, securities regulation
and employment law.
11. International trade law, conflict of laws issues, dispute resolution.
12. Laws protecting consumer privacy and the environment.
Total Hours

Hours
6.00

4.00
3.00

2.00
6.00
6.00
4.00
6.00

2.00
6.00
2.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Case Analysis
G. Small Claims Court Visitation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Class participation

E. Case Brief Submission Using the IRAC Method (Issue, Rule, Analysis, Conclusion)
F. Small Claims Court Visitation Write-Up
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material about torts and prepare for in-class discussion about how
businesses can protect themselves from tort liability.
2. Read the text material about Constitutional law and search online for a current case being
considered by the Supreme Court. Be prepared for in-class discussion about the
arguments for or against the case.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a recent Federal Supreme Court decision. Read a case summary of the opinions,
research outside opinions on the Internet, and prepare a 3-5 page written evaluation of the
opinions and decision. Use the IRAC format (Issue, Rule, Analysis, Conclusion).
2. Analyze a written case study based on a hypothetical scenarios prepared by the instructor.
Analyze the facts, identify the legal issues involved, and apply the appropriate legal
principles. Write a 3-5 page report using the IRAC format (Issue, Rule, Analysis,
Conclusion).
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a law library and look up a particular statute of interest to you. Prepare a 3-5 page
written evaluation of the three cases that have been decided regarding interpretation of the
statute, including brief facts from cases and rationale for interpretations.
2. Visit a small claims court and independently observe one small claims court case
involving an area of law covered in the course material. Prepare a 3-5 page written
evaluation identifying the legal issues involved, the applicable principles of law, and the
reasoning supporting the outcome of the case.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Meiners, R., Ringleb, A. and Edwards, F. . The Legal Environment of Business . 11th Edition.
Cengage Learning, 2011.
B. Luizzo. A.. Essentials of Business Law. 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
C. Reed, O.L., Shedd, P.J., Pagnattano, M.A. and Morehead, J.W.. The Legal and Regulatory
Environment of Business. 16th Edition. McGraw/Hill/Irwin, 2012.
D. Cheeseman, H.R.. The Legal Environment of Business and Online Commerce. 7th Edition.
Pearson, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Instructor provided sample cases, business documents, graphs, diagrams, etc.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 03/04/2013

