BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 35 - Management and Human Relations
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the role effective human relations plays in enhancing today’s diverse,
multi-cultural work environment and facilitating individual and organizational success. This course
emphasizes concepts and assessment relating to individual factors (such as personality, attitudes,
values, learning style) and to how employees throughout organizations interact with one another (such
as communication, leadership styles, conflict resolution approaches). The course enables both
managers/supervisors and those not currently in leadership roles to better understand work dynamics
and devise appropriate strategies to enhance human relations and organizational and career success.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Discuss key business concepts relating to both individual factors and interpersonal dynamics
that influence human behavior at work.
B. Take a contingency approach in assessing situations and devising strategies, identifying and
considering influencing factors and considering alternative approaches (given possible
outcomes).
C. Identify and describe his/her personal strengths and weaknesses related to human relations in the
workplace and devise a specific improvement plan.
D. Research, present and discuss cross-cultural differences in business conduct and employee
relations in the workplace, such as workforce diversity, leadership styles, employee attitudes and
communication.
E. Assess a management case and write a detailed, insightful case analysis report, identifying
symptoms of (and factors contributing to) an organization’s dysfunction and devising
appropriate recommendations to resolve concerns.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding Behavior, Human Relations and Performance
2. Personality, Stress, Learning and Perception
3. Attitudes, Self-Concept, Values and Ethics
4. Time and Career Management
5. Communications, Emotions and Criticism
6. Dealing with Conflict
7. Leading and Trust
8. Motivating Performance
9. Ethical Power, Politics and Etiquette
10. Networking and Negotiating

Hours
3.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00

11. Team Dynamics, Creativity, Problem-Solving and Decision-Making
12. Organizational Change, Culture and Development
13. Valuing Diversity Globally
14. Conducting Case Analysis
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Papers
E. Oral Presentation
F. Homework
G. Group Participation
H. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material on ethics, including the description of the three stages of moral
development: pre-conventional, conventional and post-convention. Conduct on-line
research about businesses’ concerns about ethics and recent ethical transgressions. Prepare
for class discussion of what businesses can do to optimize and reinforce the ethical
behavior of their employees (operating at various stages of moral development).
2. Read the text material pertaining to motivation theories: needs, choice and reinforcement.
Prepare for in-class discussion about: --how these theories differ from one another; --ways
in which company strategies address Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs; and --implications of
the choice theories (expectancy and equity) for business managers wanting to motivate
their employees.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Throughout the semester, complete assigned self-assessments relating to your personal
traits and interpersonal style (e.g., personality, communication, conflict management,
leadership). For each self-assessment, record your result and write a paragraph reflecting
on about it (e.g., its accuracy, its impact). After completion of all assessments, use a
prescribed format to write a typed, two-page memo, using descriptive sentences to detail
your strengths, opportunities and improvement plan.
2. Read and critically evaluate a five- to eight-page handout provided by the instructor that
describes a dysfunctional work situation/environment. Identify the symptoms or indicators
that problems exist, then specify the causes (or contributing factors). For each
contributing factor, note relevant evidence from the case to support your determining it is
an issue.

Write up your case analysis findings in a five-page report, using a prescribed format:
Situation (including identification of symptoms); Contributing Factors;
Recommendations: Short-Term; and Recommendations: Long-Term.
Your case write-up will be assessed based on your comprehensive analysis; application of
relevant course concepts; use of the required format; ability to distinguish between
symptoms and contributing factors; inclusion of evidence to substantiate your
identification of contributing factors; incorporation of specific ideas as to how
recommendations might be implemented; and grammar, spelling, punctuation and
sentence/paragraph development.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Cross-Cultural Project Plan:
As a member of a three- to six-person team of students, select a country and devise a
project plan for the completion of your cross-cultural report and PowerPoint presentation.
Identify team members, best way(s) of contacting them and their availability throughout
the semester. Discuss individuals’ work styles and relevant skills. Determine and use the
template format provided to depict the sequence of tasks to be completed prior to the final
due date, appropriate due dates for work-in-progress, and team members responsible for
various tasks. Use this plan/template as the basis for managing your cross-cultural team
project process and enhancing team output.
2. Cross-Cultural Report/Presentation: As a member of a three- to six-person
team of students, conduct research on the business environment and business practices in
a country of your choice. Gather information pertaining to such things as the economic
system; demographics; the educational system; attitudes about diversity and women in the
workplace; communication; office practices; etiquette; and conflict resolution approaches.
After researching, collaboratively write a 15 to 20 page research paper (using APA style),
following the format provided and incorporating references throughout and a
bibliography. Your report will be assessed in terms of organization and format;
appropriate depth and scope of content; appropriate citations/bibliography; and grammar,
spelling and punctuation.
Also as a team, prepare (and present to the class) a 20-minute PowerPoint presentation.
Your team's presentation will be assessed in terms of the quality of your PowerPoints (in
terms of appropriate depth of content, visual appeal; and correct grammar, spelling and
punctuation) and your practiced, professional presentation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Reece, B.L., Brandt, R., and Howie, K.T.. Effective Human Relations: Interpersonal and
Organizational Applications. 12th Edition. Cengage, 2013.
B. Lussier, R.N.. Human Relations in Organizations: Applications and Skill Building. 9th Edition.
McGraw-Hill, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Instructor may provide supplementary materials.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

