BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 27 - Introduction to Marketing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: BUS 26
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course introduces the basic principles and practices of business marketing. Following a
discussion of what marketing entails, students learn to conduct marketing research, understand
consumer behavior, develop a competitive advantage and select target markets. The emphasis is on
devising appropriate strategies and tactics relating to the “4 Ps” of marketing: Product, Price,
Promotion and Place.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain key marketing concepts and terms, such as marketing, market gap analysis, product,
product life cycle, competitive advantage, product differentiation, product mix and market
segment.
B. Describe the factors affecting pricing and apply standard mark-up and mark-down procedures.
C. Devise a sample budget for promotional expenses, emphasizing use of the objective-and-task
budgeting approach.
D. Identify and describe the steps in the personal selling process and the role of personal selling in
the promotion mix.
E. Develop a promotion plan for a hypothetical business, integrating the use of advertising,
publicity, social media, sales promotion and personal selling.
F. Develop an advertising campaign, including media selection, timing and writing and/or
designing effective copy.
G. Describe elements of the distribution channel, including a multi-channel approach that might
appropriately be used with a consumer product.
H. Apply business principles and think critically to: evaluate business opportunities; determine
competitive advantages; devise preliminary marketing strategies; and identify problems and
develop solutions to deal with them.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Marketing: An Introduction
2. Using Data to Make Informed Decisions
3. Consumer Behavior Basics
4. Marketing Segmentation and Target Marketing
5. Marketing Strategy: Developing a Competitive Advantage
6. "Product" (Tangible and Intangible Products, Branding, Packaging, Product
Life Cycle, Inventory Purchase and Control)
7. "Price" (Methods for Determining and Adjusting Price)

Hours
1.00
1.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
2.00
1.00

8. "Place" (Distribution Channels, e-Commerce, Physical Distribution,
Location, Atmospherics and In-Store Layout)
9. "Promotion" (Advertising, Publicity, Sales Promotion, Social Marketing
and Personal Selling)
10. Budgeting for Marketing Expenditures and Assessing Results
11. Writing a Marketing Plan
Total Hours

1.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Independent Research for Developing a Business Plan
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text information about distribution channels and gather additional information
online, as necessary. For a list of specific products and target markets (provided), identify
and describe the distribution channel(s) that you would use and present a rationale as to
why each would be appropriate. Prepare for in-class discussion of your ideas.
2. Read the text information about market segmentation and target market selection. In
particular, focus on mass marketing, multiple target marketing and single target marketing
approaches. Prepare for an in-class application and discussion of the relative advantages
and disadvantages of these approaches.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the text information pertaining to the Product Life Cycle (PLC) and research on the
Internet to gather data to support your determination as to whether your product is in the
Introductory, Growth, Maturity or Decline stage. Using descriptive sentences,
characterize your product type in terms of sales potential, profit potential, level of
competition and customer group(s). Then, for this stage of the PLC, devise your
company’s strategy relative to each of the four Ps: Product, Price, Promotion and Place.
Write all of this information in a two- to three-page report, using a format that effectively
organizes and presents your analysis and ideas.
2. Describe a small retail business you could possibly see yourself opening and identify your
target customers and operational needs. Assess 3 possible business locations in the local
area in terms of the “retail location filters” presented in your textbook. Write up your
assessment and select the optimal location, providing your rationale (approximately three
to five pages, total).

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read the text material relating to primary and secondary research. For an entrepreneurial
opportunity of your choice, specify secondary research that might support your business
decisions (and where you would acquire it). Describe the purposes for which you might
engage in primary research and identify feasible primary research approaches you might
use. Brainstorm some of the open- and closed-ended questions that you might include in a
survey or for use with a focus group. Your write-up will be approximately five- to
seven-pages long.
2. Flesh out the “marketing plan” component of your small business plan (ten- to
twelve-pages). Describe your business (including the industry in which you operate, your
products and services and your market share); identify and characterize your target
market(s); assess your competition (and their competitive strategies/advantages); perform
a SWOT analysis (Strengths/Weaknesses/Opportunities/Threats); list your goals and
tactics (including your promotional plan); create a sample advertising campaign; and
devise your marketing budget.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Pool, J.. Marketing for Solos: THE Ultimate How-To Guide for Marketing Your One Person
Small Business Successfully. 1st Edition. 3 BAR Press, 2011.
B. Nicholas, J., Johnson, J-C. and LeMoine, M.. Small Business Marketing: Your Ultimate Guide.
1st Edition. JE2000, LLC, 2013.
C. Levinson, J.C. and Levinson, J.. The Best of Guerrilla Marketing: Guerrilla Marketing Remix.
1st Edition. Entrepreneur Media, Inc., 2011.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/29/2013

