BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 66 - Retail Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course presents essential concepts in the retailing field, from store location and organization to
the purchase, handling, display, pricing and advertising of merchandise. Emphasis is placed on the
practical concepts of retail management.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define the terms, principles and theories relating to retail planning, strategy and implementation
B. Explain factors associated with buying behavior and describe related store layout, design, and
visual merchandising decisions
C. Analyze a retail marketing strategy and its appropriateness given target market(s)
D. Determine the best method for retail operations based on situation analysis and research. Make
written or oral statements about the justification for the selected method and potential
implications.
E. Analyze customer buying behavior in today’s globally competitive and technologically-infused
environment and its retailing implications
F. Conduct a retail audit to demonstrate mastery of course concepts including customer buying
behavior, retail planning, strategy, store layout, visual merchandising, and operations.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the World of Retailing
2. Types of Retailers
3. Multi-Channel Retailing – A View into the Future
4. Customer Buyer Behavior
5. Retail Market Strategy
6. Financial Strategy
7. Retail Locations
8. Site Selection
9. Human Resource Management
10. Information Systems and Supply Chain Management
11. Customer Relationship Management
12. Planning Merchandise Assortments
13. Buying Systems
14. Buying Merchandise
15. Pricing

Hours
3.00
1.50
1.50
3.00
3.00
2.00
1.50
1.50
3.00
3.00
2.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
3.00

16. Retail Communication Mix
17. Managing the Store
18. Store Layout, Design, and Visual Merchandising
19. Customer Service
20. Retail Audit and/or Case Analysis Presentation
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Case Analyses
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Retail Audit
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on "Perspectives in Retailing.” Identify 3 ways the internet has affected
retailing and describe your use of internet retail shopping.
2. Read the chapter on “Managing the Supply Chain.” Research job opportunities in Retail
Supply Chain Management. Be prepared to share your examples in class and describe why
you would or wouldn’t want to work in Supply Chain Management.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research retail merchandising and buying trends. Locate an article related to these
subjects. Read the article thoroughly and then summarize what you’ve learned in a 1 page
paper (5 paragraphs). The business writing rubric applies.
2. After reading the chapter on Retail Pricing, draft a 1 paragraph response to each of the
following questions:
1. What factors should a retailer consider when establishing pricing objectives and
policies?
2. Why is markdown management so important in retailing?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Select a retailer you are very interested in due to their product mix or unique retail
strategy. Review the 10 page Retail Business Audit Project Template attached and
complete it following the guided research and analysis process located in your text.
2. Visit a local retailer, review all aspects of their product mix, store location, merchandise
selection and pricing. Take detailed notes on your critique of this local retailer. Draft a 5-8
page Retail Strategy Assessment and be prepared to share your summary and suggested
improvements with your classmates.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Dunne, P.M., Lusch R.F., Carver J.R. Retailing. 8th Edition. Cengage , 2013.
B. Berman, B.R., and Evans., J.R . Retail Management: A Strategic Approach. 12th Edition.
Pearson, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Lisa Christiansen
Date: 04/01/2013

