BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 20 - Introduction to Business
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is survey of business, providing a multidisciplinary examination of how culture, society,
economic systems, legal, international, political, financial institutions, and human behavior interact to
affect a business organization’s policy and practices within the U.S. and a global society. Students will
learn about how this business context (including issues such as ethics and sustainability) influences
the primary areas of business including: organizational structure and design; leadership, human
resource management, organized labor practices; marketing; organizational communication;
technology; entrepreneurship; legal, accounting, financial practices; the stock and securities market;
and therefore affect a business’ ability to achieve its organizational goals. (C-ID BUS 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Cite the various ways the U.S. government affects, restricts, and protects business.
B. Compare and contrast the advantages/disadvantages in each form of business ownership.
C. Apply the entrepreneurial process for identifying and exploiting potential business
opportunities.
D. Define business ethics and social responsibility and examine ethical dilemmas pertaining to
internal and external stakeholders.
E. Compare and contrast the primary economic systems.
F. Identify different methods of engaging in international business given their challenges including
trade barriers, regulatory issues and cultural differences.
G. Define and describe the key management functions of planning, organizing, leading and
controlling.
H. Examine current production and operations processes including sustainability initiatives.
I. Discuss the human resource functions of hiring, motivating, training and compensating
employees and the laws governing these practices.
J. Identify the marketing mix and key tools, terms and strategies related to each element.
K. Describe and identify how technology impacts all the primary functions of business.
L. Evaluate the basic components of financial statements and ratio analysis.
M. Explain the importance of finance to the operations of business; the various types of financing;
and the process of internal and external financing and controls.
N. Identify securities markets including investment options, mechanisms of investing, and how to
conduct basic analysis of business financial information.
O. Identify and describe the basics of business law including contracts, torts, intellectual property,
and the American legal system.
P. Summarize the components of risk management and basic insurance concepts.
Q. Utilize a variety of resources to investigate potential career paths and assess their compatibility
with the students' own personality, interest and aptitudes.
R. Identify, describe and present potential strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats to a
business from an operations perspective.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Historical Background and Current Trends in Businss
2. Forms of Business Enterprise
3. Legal, Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Business
4. Economic Foundations
5. International Business Environment and Strategies
6. Management, Leadership, Motivation and Organization Structure
7. Production and Operations Management
8. Human Resource Management and Employee-Management Issues
9. Marketing, Marketing Research and Consumer Behavior
10. E-Business and Information Technology
11. Accounting
12. Financial Management
13. Securities Markets and the Financial System
14. Business Law
15. Risk Management and Insurance
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
7.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Homework
F. Group Participation
G. Class participation
H. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on Production and Operations Management, and review the secion on
making ethical decisions feature. Answer the three questions presented at the end of the
section. Prepare to discuss and support your perspective in class with other students.
2. Read the chapter on using effective promotions, specifically reviewing the section on

thinking green feature. Identify, then review a "green company" of your choice, assessing
and describing in writing with what success the company has promoted green products. Be
sure to include the Web address for the company you've selected.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the career assignment, submitting a resume and a 5 page research paper relating
to the business occupation of your choice. Use the specific, required templates/formats
that will be provided.
2. As a member of a team of students, research an industry, then (following the specified
format) write a 15 page industry report using APA citation style and make an in-class
presentation. Submit self- and peer-assessments.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Meet with your industry project team and plan for success. Discuss, then identify, the
project steps, milestones, due dates and roles/ responsibilities to be played by each team
member. Complete, then submit, the 1-2 page Industry Work Plan template (provided),
including signatures from all team members.
2. Conduct an informational interview with someone in the line of work you are researching
for your occupational report. Prior to the interview, prepare by watching instructor-posted
videos on interviewing and review sample interview questions. Write a 5 page report
detailing relevant information provided by the person you've interviewed.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Nickels, W.G., McHugh, J., and McHugh, S.. Business: Connecting Principles to Practice.
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012.
B. Boone, L.E. and Kurtz, D.L.. Contemporary Business. 15th Edition. Wiley, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 03/04/2013

