BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 64 - Principles of Marketing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course explores the nature, function and importance of marketing. It focuses on conducting
opportunity analysis, assessing consumer behavior, engaging in marketing research, and target
marketing as the basis for devising marketing objectives and plans. Students will develop and assess
marketing strategies to meet the needs of target markets (both consumer and business-to-business
(B2B)), using the “4 Ps”: product, promotion, price and place (distribution). The emphasis is on
ethical, needs-satisfaction, relationship marketing in today’s global, technology-infused, competitive
environment.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and discuss key marketing concepts and tools necessary to help organizations satisfy
customers' needs and develop and sustain a competitive advantage.
B. Critically assess situations, then apply marketing principles and practices to: a. Conduct basic
marketing research b. Define and segment consumer and B2B markets c. Develop
needs-satisfying products and services d. Devise appropriate pricing and distributing strategies e.
Create promotional campaigns using tools such as advertising, personal selling, publicity, sales
promotion and social media.
C. Comprehensively and systematically evaluate an existing organization, its marketing operations
and potential, then complete a marketing audit or create a marketing plan.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Marketing: The Art and Science of Satisfying Customers
2. Strategic Planning in Contemporary Marketing
3. The Marketing Environment, Ethics, and Social Responsibility
4. E-Business: Managing the Customer Experience
5. Consumer Behavior
6. Business-to-Business (B2B) Marketing
7. Global Marketing
8. Marketing Research and Sales Forecasting
9. Market Segmentation, Targeting and Positioning
10. Relationship Marketing and Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
11. Product and Service Strategies
12. Developing and Managing Brand and Product Categories
13. Marketing Channels and Supply Chain Management

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
1.50
4.00
2.50
3.00
4.00
3.00
1.50
3.00
2.50
1.50

14. Retailers, Wholesalers and Direct Marketers
15. Integrated Marketing Communications
16. Advertising and Public Relations
17. Personal Selling and Sales Promotion
18. Price Concepts
19. Pricing Strategies
20. Conducting Marketing Audit and Marketing Plans
Total Hours

1.50
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.50
1.50
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Group Participation
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material about the consumer decision-making process and the determinants
of consumer behavior. Review your notes on our prior discussions of e-business, social
media and global marketing. Prepare for in-class discussion of the impact of technology
and global competition on consumer behavior – and on optimal competitive strategies.
2. Read the text material about market segmentation, focusing specifically on the bases for
segmenting consumer markets. Prepare for in-class discussion of various industries or
types of organizations (e.g., online dating, charitable organizations, auto manufacturers)
and the ways in which they target markets based on geographic, demographic,
psychographic and product-related factors.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Following review of the product life cycle (PLC) concept, choose a product type (e.g.,
SUVs, cosmetic dentistry, MP3 players, laptop computers) on which to focus. Create four
1-2 page worksheet templates, one for each stage of the product life cycle (i.e.,
Introduction, Growth, Maturity, Decline). On each, describe (in detailed sentence format)
the industry’s sales, the industry’s profits, the nature of the competition, the target
audience(s) and typical strategies relative to the 4 Ps (product, price, promotion and
place).
2. Identify a marketing decision you could best make after conducting marketing research.
---Specifically identify and describe secondary data that might facilitate your decision –
and explain how it might be beneficial and/or of limited use.

--To gather information pertinent to this decision, brainstorm and write a dozen
open-ended questions you could use to conduct primary research with a focus group.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Marketing Audit Report/Presentation: As a member of a three- to six-person team, audit
the marketing activities of a local company/organization. Collaboratively research, write
and edit a 15- to 20-page report, following the prescribed format provided (including
headings/ subheadings and content written in complete sentences and paragraphs).
Create a visually appealing, professional PowerPoint presentation, and practice (then
effectively deliver) your 20-minute, in-class presentation. Individually, complete a peer
assessment sheet evaluating (and describing) the contribution(s) of each team member,
yourself included.
2. Marketing Plan Report/Presentation: As a member of a three- to six-person team, research
a local company/organization and devise a detailed marketing plan. Collaboratively
research, write and edit a 15- to 20-page report, following the prescribed format provided
(including headings/ subheadings and content written in complete sentences and
paragraphs).
Create a visually appealing, professional PowerPoint presentation, and practice (then
effectively deliver) your 20-minute, in-class presentation. Individually, complete a peer
assessment sheet evaluating (and describing) the contribution(s) of each team member,
yourself included.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Perrault, J.C. Jr. and McCarthy, E.J.. Essentials of Marketing. 13th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
B. Boone, L.E. and Kurtz, D.L.. Contemporary Marketing. 15th Edition. Cengage, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Instructors may provide supplementary materials.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

