BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 26 - Steps to Starting a Small Business
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course provides students with an overview of the actual process of starting a new business,
acquiring an existing business, or purchasing a franchise. Beginning with the prospective
entrepreneur’s business idea, the course introduces students to the basic considerations and tasks
necessary prior to “opening day.”
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the problems and prospects of opening a small business.
B. Explain the relative advantages and disadvantages of starting a business, acquiring an existing
business and buying a franchise.
C. Articulate the financial, legal, competitive and operational factors to consider before buying a
business or franchise.
D. Explain the legal and licensing requirements of starting a business.
E. Analyze the advantages and disadvantages of debt and equity financing.
F. Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of different types of business entities including sole
proprietorships, partnerships, corporation, and Limited Liability Companies (LLC).
G. Apply business principles and think critically to: evaluate business opportunities; determine
competitive advantages; devise preliminary business strategies; identify potential problems and
develop solutions to deal with them.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Self-Evaluation for Prospective Business Owners
2. Spotting Trends and Opportunities
3. Feasibility Analysis and Opportunity Selection
4. Profiling Your Target Customer
5. Reading and Beating the Competition
6. Location and Distribution
7. Connecting with and Engaging Customers
8. Start-Up Concerns and Financial Projections
9. Shaking the Money Tree
10. Legal Concerns
11. Build, Maintain and Thrive with a Winning Team
12. Protect Yourself with Insurance
13. Buying an Existing Business

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.50
1.00

14. Investigating Franchising
15. Writing the Business Plan
Total Hours

1.00
3.50
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Independent Research for Developing a Business Plan
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the material pertaining to entrepreneurial success and conduct an honest,
comprehensive self-assessment. Prepare for in-class discussion of the skills and talents
related to entrepreneurial success and your personal potential as an entrepreneur.
2. Read the text information about franchising and do online research to learn the specifics
relating to 3 franchises that might be of interest to you. Identify the products/services
provided by each franchisor – and the initial and ongoing payments and operational
requirements of the franchisee. Having done this assessment, how likely is it you would
purchase a franchise? Which one(s)? Why or why not?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write your preliminary (five- to seven-page) business plan, incorporating each of the
sections identified in the format provided to you by your instructor.
2. For your specific small business idea, identify and research three of your competitors.
Write a three- to five-page report detailing the competitive advantages of each of the firms
(your own included). What strategies might you use to increase your firm’s success?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Describe your business idea. Project the annual revenues that you believe you can
generate, spelling out what you’ll have to do to generate that income (e.g., sell how many
units, at what price, …). Identify the upfront costs you will incur before you open the
door, your ongoing fixed costs and your variable costs per unit. Based on your preliminary
financial assessment, is your business idea feasible?
2. Given your self-assessment of your strengths and talents, what skills and proficiencies are
you likely to need to acquire via your employees and/or outsourcing. Be specific as to the
job titles of the individuals you would likely hire and the tasks they would perform.
Identify whether you would need their assistance on a regular basis or as consultants or
members of a contingent workforce. Investigate salaries online to determine what you
might expect to pay to acquire the expertise you’ll need. Write a three- to five-page report
presenting your findings.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hiduke, G. & Ryan, J.D.. Small Business: An Entrepreneur’s Business Plan. 9th Edition.
South-Western, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/29/2013

