BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 28 - Planning and Financing the Small Business
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: BUS 27
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course introduces basic issues relating to planning and financing (and managing the risks
associated with owning) a small business. Topics will include legal planning, risk management
(including insurance planning), tax planning, and financial analysis and planning. Students will
complete a detailed business plan, the basis for attracting both debt and equity capital for a new
venture.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply basic legal principles to small business planning and management scenarios.
B. Explain risk management and insurance considerations relevant for small businesses.
C. Describe a business' tax obligations: self-employment, payroll, sales, income and other.
D. Evaluate sources of small business financing including Small Business
Administration(SBA)-sponsored programs.
E. Analyze financial statements to determine a small business' liquidity position, inventory
turnover, credit control, leverage, profitability and other financial and operating conditions.
F. Prepare income and cash flow projections.
G. Create a comprehensive business plan (including an introduction, business description,
marketing plan, sales and financial projections, business risk analysis and personal resume) for
financing and managing a small business.
H. Apply business principles and think critically to: evaluate business opportunities; analyze and
prepare business financial statements; compare business ratios against industry averages; and
identify problems and develop solutions to deal with them.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Legal Planning for a Small Business
2. Insurance Planning for a Small Business
3. Tax Obligations and Tax Management for a Small Business
4. Financing the Small Business
5. Analyzing Financial Statements
6. Income and Cash Flow Projections and Break-Even Projections
7. Business Plan
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
5.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Independent Research for Developing a Business Plan
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Identify the purposes for which you might need to hire an experienced attorney. Research
online to learn how much time – and how many dollars -- this might entail. Based on your
research, would you anticipate paying for legal expertise? Why or why not? Prepare for
in-class discussion on this topic.
2. Read the text material about possible business structures. For your prospective small
business, please prepare for in-class discussion of which form you are likely to choose,
and why.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research, then write a brief, 3- to 5-page paper describing: 1) your business’ tax
obligations, such as self-employment, payroll, sales and income tax; 2) your business’
potential legal liabilities; and 3) your plan for insuring that your tax obligations are met
and your legal risks are minimized during year one of your business operation.
2. Finalize your detailed, comprehensive business plan (approximately 25 pages long),
including an introduction, executive summary, business description, marketing plan,
financial projections (including income statement, cash flow projections and break-even
analysis), business risk analysis and your personal resume.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct a break-even analysis, calculating how many units you must sell (or dollars of
revenue you must generate) prior to earning a profit. On what assumptions is this
break-even analysis based? Based on annual sales projections, how long would it take you
to break-even? What might you do to improve your performance?
2. Calculate your projected monthly sales (for an entire year) based on several “What-If
Scenarios.” Describe the impact of seasonality and economic cycles on your sales
projections.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Adelman, P.J. and Marks, A.M.. Entrepreneurial Finance. 6th Edition. Prentice-Hall, 2013.
B. Rogers, S.. Entrepreneurial Finance: Finance and Business Strategies for the Serious
Entrepreneur. 2nd Edition. McGraw-Hill Publishing, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/29/2013

