BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 60 - Advertising and Copywriting
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the function of advertising in relation to business and society. It
looks at advertising as a social and economic institution. Emphasis is placed on identifying the best
strategy and advertising medium to achieve the business objective. Students will plan an advertising
campaign including defining a target audience, research markets, select the most effective advertising
mediums, select media outlets, estimate the campaign budget and draft advertising copy. The
advertising campaign project builds an understanding of traditional and digital advertising, writing
radio or podcast copy, and storyboarding for television or digital advertising.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Discuss the economic, regulatory and global aspects of the use of advertising to achieve
business objectives
B. Evaluate market research techniques and application in advertising strategy and message
development
C. Examine consumer behavior and the role advertising plays in motivation
D. Define the components and the process of developing an advertising schedule and budget
E. Compare the strengths and weaknesses of the various media for advertising (TV, radio,
newspaper, www, magazine, outdoor, yellow pages, etc.)
F. Evaluate purchase of media time and space through research of rates and services
G. Apply the principles of advertising strategy when evaluating advertising campaigns.
H. Define the complete suite of marketing tools and the advantages of an integrated marketing
communications strategy
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction and Historical Review of Advertising
2. Advertising impact; global/local, economic, social and regulatory
3. Market research, segmentation and review of marketing mix
4. Consumer Motivation and Buyer Behavior Models
5. Marketing planning: Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC)
6. Media strategy, planning, selection and buying
7. Advertising techniques, strategy and the creative process
8. Preparing Advertising Copy: online, print, TV, Radio
9. Television and Radio Advertising
10. Print and digital media advertising
11. Internet promotions; website, search engine and social media

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

11. Internet promotions; website, search engine and social media
12. Project management of advertising production for both print and digital
mediums.
13. Secondary Media: Direct Mail, Outdoor, Yellow Pages
14. Crafting integrated marketing and advertising strategies and plans
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Cumulative advertising campaign project
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on “Using Print Media.” Based on the principles in this chapter, collect 3
excellent examples of print advertising. Be prepared to share the ads with the class and
explain how they demonstrate effective advertising.
2. Read the chapters on economic, regulatory and global aspects of advertising. Research
and identify 2 articles that exemplify the types of issues created by these aspects of
advertising. Write a 1-2 paragraph summary of the article and your thoughts. Be prepared
to share your article summary with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 8-10 research plan for the following hypothetical new product launch.
Product: ecofriendly reusable lunch box
Complete your research, summarize the potential for three target audiences. Include what
advertising strategy you recommend and which of the marketing tools you would employ
to achieve the business objective.
2. Research “Blog Promotions” on the internet. Read at least three articles outlining what it
takes to successfully promote a Blog. Write a 1 page business email from you to your boss
summarizing your findings of successful blog promotion and your recommendation for
next steps.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Become a student of advertising in your environment this week. Collect at least 2 samples
of the four major types of advertising: TV, Radio, Print and Online. Collect these samples
and arrange them into a powerpoint. Emphasize on each slide, the key message of the ad,

advertising style used and inferred or direct call to action. Be prepared to present and
submit your slides in class this week.
2. Write an 8-10 page report and create an executive summary of the input you would
provide to a graphic design or multimedia agency with which your firm will be working
on a new product launch. Give a 20 minute presentation on your project to the class during
the last two weeks of the semester. You may also be asked to submit in-progress updates.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Arends, W.F. Contemporary Advertising. 9th Edition. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2011.
B. Shimp, T.A,. and Andrews, J.C. Advertising Promotion and Other Aspects of Integrated
Marketing Communications. 9th Edition. Cengage, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Lisa Christiansen
Date: 04/01/2013

