BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 50 - Sales in Today's World
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces personal selling concepts, processes and tools. It emphasizes the importance of
ethical, professional conduct; an understanding of consumer behavior; needs-satisfaction selling; and
effective two-way communication. Students learn how to find and qualify prospects; establish rapport;
ask questions to determine customers’ needs; present pertinent product/service features, advantages
and benefits; overcome buyers’ objections; and close the sale. Students will participate (as buyers,
sellers and critical observers) in interactive sales presentations.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Conduct self-assessments, then identify and describe personal traits that would be advantageous
and challenging in a career as a professional salesperson.
B. Recognize and apply the principles and steps associated with a systematic, needs-satisfaction
approach to selling.
C. Focus on more than product features by developing awareness and generating lists of associated
advantages, benefits, and trial closes.
D. Engage in conversation, asking a series of open- and closed-ended questions, to confirm
understanding of the customer's needs/wants.
E. Address customer's objections and concerns about the purchase proposition by communicating
honestly, clearly and directly.
F. Demonstrate mastery of course concepts by developing and executing an effective, interactive
oral sales presentation, customized to the buyer's communication style and buying criteria.
G. Plan and write an effective sales proposal using a prescribed format.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Life, Times, and Career of the Professional Salesperson
2. Ethics First… Then Customer Relationships
3. The Psychology of Selling: Why People Buy
4. Communication for Relationship Building: It's Not All Talk
5. Sales Knowledge: Customers, Products, and Technologies
6. Prospecting: The Lifeblood of Selling
7. Planning the Sales Call is a Must!
8. Carefully Select Which Sales Presentation Method to Use
9. Begin Your Presentation Strategically
10. Elements of a Great Sales Presentation
11. Welcome Your Prospects Objections
12. Closing Begins the Relationship

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

12. Closing Begins the Relationship
13. Service and Follow-Up for Customer Retention
14. Time and Territory Management: Keys to Success
15. Sales Presentations and Critiques
16. Sales Arithmetic and Pricing
Total Hours

3.00
2.00
3.00
6.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Demonstration
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Oral Sales Presentation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material on ethics, including the ethics scenarios at the end of the chapter.
Prepare to thoroughly discuss each scenario in class in terms of: -- whether the individuals
described have conducted themselves appropriately; -- what legal, ethical and/or business
ramifications might ensue from these behaviors; and -- what appropriate course(s) of
action would be.
2. Read the text material describing the life and career of the salesperson. Complete
self-assessments pertaining to your career interests and communication style. Prepare for
in-class discussion with several classmates about what appeals (and doesn’t appeal) to you
about a sales career, your potential strengths as a sales person, and areas on which to
improve.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read an article or book pertaining to being a successful sales professional. Write a 2-3
page executive summary of the article/book, including: a brief introduction; a presentation
of relevant information presented in this article; and your conclusions as to the validity,
applicability and/or importance of this information for today’s sales professional.
2. Write a 6- to 10-page report to prepare for your successful, interactive sales presentation.
Describe your prospect, his/her buying criteria and possible objections. Write a brief
competitive analysis, identifying your product’s advantages over your competitors’.
Complete a “Features/Advantages/Benefits” chart, allowing you better discuss benefits,
rather than focusing on product features. Then, for the following report sections,
brainstorm and write what you might actually say during the following states of the sales
presentation: Approach, Problem Recognition, Handling Objections, Close (including

Trial Close), Exit.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct a 45-minute to hour-long interview with a sales professional, asking questions
about such things as the nature of his/her job responsibilities; the advantages (and
challenges) of a career in sales; ethical challenges faced by salespeople in the 21st
century; the nature of compensation, supervision, technological support and career path
opportunities; how to build rapport with customers; and needs-satisfaction selling. Write
up your findings in a substantive, 5 page report, following the format provided and using
excellent grammar, spelling, punctuation and sentence/paragraph development.
2. Conduct a “Secret Shopper” visit to a retail establishment where sales people are engaging
in needs-satisfaction selling. Complete the 10 page assessment form provided, evaluating
the salesperson’s and company’s sales efforts using the relevant scales and checklists.
Write descriptive statements to support your conclusions.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Futrell, C.M.. ABC's of Relationship Selling Through Service. 12th Edition.
Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2013.
B. Manning,G.L., Ahearne, M.L., and Reece, B.L.. Selling Today. 12th Edition. Prentice-Hall,
2012.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

