BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 68 - Business on the Internet
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to web marketing tools, strategies, application and measurement. It
examines benefits and challenges associated with web marketing technologies including web site
development, search engine optimization, online advertising, social media, email campaigns, blog
marketing, digital public relations, multimedia and mobile marketing. Students will learn how to
create a web marketing strategy and then apply web marketing technologies in a measurable way to
achieve business objectives.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the technologies used for web marketing.
B. Evaluate and recommend the best mix of web marketing tools to achieve specific business
objectives.
C. Use appropriate terminology to communicate with website designers, developers and marketing
services vendors.
D. Identify potential security issues relating to e-commerce.
E. Explain legal issues facing web marketers and e-commerce developers.
F. Utilize a variety of resources to manage web marketing plans, budgets activities and results
improvement.
G. Discuss future trends in web marketing and e-commerce.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Course Overview and Introduction to Web Marketing
2. Preparing for and Creating a Web Marketing Plan
3. Web Marketing and E-commerce Research
4. Marketing Strategies on the Web
5. Understanding Best Stratagies for Designing, Creating and Tracking an
Effective Website
6. Search Engine Marketing
7. Online Advertising
8. Research in Online Advertising
9. Email Marketing
10. Blog Marketing
11. Social Media Marketing
12. Online PR

Hours
2.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

13. Multimedia Marketing
14. Mobile Marketing
15. Online Marketing Management
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapters on “The Ultimate Web Marketing Guide.” Research and identify 2
examples of text ads and 2 examples of display ads. Be prepared to share your examples in
class, identify the key message and discuss your thoughts about the business objective for
each ad.
2. Read the chapters on the “The Ultimate Web Marketing Guide.” Research and identify 3
very effective examples of Blog Marketing and be prepared to share them with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research “internet privacy policy infraction.” Find an article that interests you on this
subject and read it thoroughly. Write a one page report including a 1 paragraph article
summary and 2-3 paragraphs on your response to the article. The business writing rubric
applies.
2. Research email marketing on the Web. Based on your research, write a bulleted list
identifying the top 15-20 characteristics of successful email marketing campaigns.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Web Strategy Project: As a team create a comprehensive (8-10 page)Web strategy for a
local company using course concepts from the text, lecture, discussion, and your research.
Use the attached report template, writing rubric and presentation template to guide your
formatting and content.
2. Read the assigned chapter and research the subject online.
Identify two examples of excellent web marketing pertaining to the chapter you studied.
Write a one page chapter report summarizing what you learned.
Create a PowerPoint presentation (2-4 slides) to share with the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Miller, M.. The Ultimate Web Marketing Guide. Pearson Education, Inc., 2011.

A. Miller, M.. The Ultimate Web Marketing Guide. Pearson Education, Inc., 2011.
B. Laudon, K.C.. E-commerce: Business. Technology. Society. . 8th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Lisa Christiansen
Date: 04/01/2013

