BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
BUS 40 - Organization Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines managerial concepts, approaches and tools relevant for organizations operating
in today’s changing, diverse, technology-infused and globally-competitive business environment.
Within an ethics and contingency management framework, it focuses on three of the fundamental
management functions: planning, organizing and controlling. It provides perspectives and guidelines
and develops competencies to assist managers in understanding and addressing organizational
problems.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain and apply terms, specific facts, and theories relating to the major environmental factors
and operational concerns influencing today’s managers.
B. Engage in informed discussion about the impacts of businesses’ ethical and socially responsible
behavior on various stakeholders and on business results.
C. Discuss and develop management strategies, based on the use of strategic and operational
planning, with an emphasis on both effective and efficient operations.
D. Identify and compare approaches to organizing in order to optimize the effective use of human,
technological and financial resources.
E. Examine and apply common control tools and operations management techniques used to direct
operations, assess performance, and facilitate actions to enhance productivity and
develop/sustain competitive advantage.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introducing Management
2. Management Learning – Past to Present
3. Ethics and Social Responsibility
4. Environment, Sustainability and Innovation
5. Global Management and Cultural Diversity
6. Entrepreneurship and New Ventures
7. Information and Decision Making
8. Planning Processes and Techniques
9. Strategy and Strategic Management
10. Organization Structures and Design
11. Organization Culture and Change
12. Human Resource Management

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00

13. Controll Processes and Systems
14. Operations and Services Management
15. Conducting Management Case Analysis
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Group Participation
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text information about organizations being “open systems,” influenced by a
variety of external factors. Conduct some online research about the sorts of external
factors impacting businesses today. Be prepared for in-class discussion about the context
in which businesses operate and the potential impact of these factors -- and brainstorming
about appropriate business strategies taken by managers in the various business functions
(e.g., Management, Production, Marketing, HRM, Accounting/Finance, IT).
2. Read the text material pertaining to ethics in the workplace. Prepare for in-class
discussion of the sorts of ethical dilemmas that business managers face (e.g.,
discrimination, conflicts of interest) – and identification of appropriate actions taken by
organizations and their employees in order to maintain high ethical standards.
B. Writing Assignments
1. You are an employee at Orleans Bank, working on your A.S. in Business Management at
Butte College. The bank has instituted a management training program that it hopes will
decrease turnover, improve operations and facilitate upward mobility for its personnel.
Self-reflect, then write a 1 to 2 page memo “selling” Orleans Bank on selecting you as a
candidate for the management training program.
2. You (and a team of several others) are volunteer board members for a hypothetical
non-profit that needs to raise funds to support its mission and expand the services
provided. The organization expects board members to assist in generating necessary
donations via special events. With your team, brainstorm and create an 8 to 10 page event
plan that incorporates specifics and could be easily understood, assessed and implemented
by staff and volunteers.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. With a small team of classmates, write an 8 to 10 page report and prepare/deliver a 20
minute PowerPoint presentation. Format both to facilitate understanding and

minute PowerPoint presentation. Format both to facilitate understanding and
implementation and address the following situation. You are applying for the Director of
Knowledge Management position with a hypothetical firm. In preparation for your job
interview:
-Identify your vision for Knowledge Management.
-Describe the training that should be provided to staff. Specify to whom, when, using what
training mode(s) and with what assessment.
-Create an organization chart depicting the structure of the Knowledge Management
Department and including job titles. Indicate to whom the Knowledge Management
Director reports.
-Create a job description and a job specification for the Director of Knowledge
Management position.
2. Read and critically evaluate a detailed case study (provided by the instructor) that
describes a dysfunctional business operation. Write up your case analysis findings in a 5
page report, following a prescribed format and applying your insights about relevant
course content. Identify the symptoms or indicators that problems exist; specify (and
provide evidence of) the causes (or contributing factors); and detail short- and long-term
recommendations to address all issues.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Certo, S.C. and Certo, T.. Modern Management. 12th Edition. Prentice-Hall, 2011.
B. Schermerhorn, J.R., Jr.. Management. 11th Edition. John Wiley, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

