BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 63 - Introduction to Early Childhood Education Curriculum
Prerequisite(s): CDF 14
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
42.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course presents an overview of knowledge and skills related to providing appropriate curriculum
and environments for young children from birth to age eight years. Students will examine a teacher's
role in supporting development and fostering the joy of learning for all young children using
observation and assessment. An overview of learning domains includes: language, social, emotional,
physical, cognitive and creative. The course will provide the student the opportunity to develop,
prepare, implement and evaluate developmentally appropriate play-based curriculum for young
children. This course includes 25.5 hours of lab in an approved (Butte College or Mentor) program.
(C-ID ECE 130).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Investigate and apply developmentally appropriate principles and teaching strategies to
positively influence all young children's development and acquisition of knowledge and skills.
B. Evaluate the teachers' role in providing the best and promising practices in early childhood
education.
C. Design, implement and evaluate curriculum based on information from families and observation
and assessment to support play and learning using developmental, inclusive and anti-bias
principles.
D. Apply knowledge of children’s learning and development in designing, implementing and
evaluating developmentally appropriate play-based curriculum in areas such as: social and
emotional, language and literacy, large and small motor, creativity and the arts, mathematics and
science.
E. Identify key ways in which the environment functions as an essential component of curriculum.
F. Describe and demonstrate how curriculum plans can be designed for inclusion of children with
special needs and for dual language learners.
G. Explain the progression of curriculum development from simple to complex and concrete to
abstract and demonstrate how these concepts are essential for curricular design.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to course objectives
2. Developmental theory as it applies to curriculum development
3. Various program models and philosophies of curriculum development (e.g.,
Reggio, Montessori, computer based, High Scope, Waldorf, Bank Street,
etc.)
4. Developmentally appropriate principles when designing curriculum and
learning environments

Hours
3.00
2.00
2.00

3.00

5. Designing and implementing curriculum based on observation and
assessment to support play and learning
6. Curriculum for language and literacy, large and small motor mastery, social
and emotional, creatvity and the arts, mathematics and science
7. California's Early Learning System
8. Early childhood classroom learning centers: The environment as teacher,
balance between naturalistic and structured spaces, soft and hard space,
traffic patterns, protected and open spaces and visual/aesthetic messages
9. The classroom environment as an essential component of curriculum and
guiding children's behaviors
10. Infant and toddler use of materials and environments
11. Multicultural perspective in all curricular areas
12. Modifying curriculum to foster individual needs
Total Hours

3.00
11.50
3.00
4.00

3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
42.50

Lab
Topics
1. Mandatory orientation for selection of site, introduction of mentor teachers
and scheduling lab times
2. Observe how to implement and evaluate appropriate curriculum practices in
an early childhood classroom
3. Observe the role of teacher in the early childhood classroom(e.g., schedules
and routines)
4. Observe a play-based program to learn the curriculum planning process
5. Prepare, implement and evaluate curriculum that supports children's learning
in the physical, cognitive, social, emotional, creative, and language domains
6. Demonstrate the ability to create a developmentally appropriate classroom
environment for young children
7. Design and evaluate curriculum using anti-bias principles in collaboration
with families to support all children
8. Demonstrate the ability to modify curriculum for inclusion of children with
special needs and for English Language Learners
9. Apply developmentally appropriate principles when designing curriculum
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
2.00
2.50
2.00
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Demonstrations
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Laboratory Experiments

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Demonstration
F. Group Participation
G. Lab Projects
H. Written Assignments
I. Curriculum Resource File
J. Lab feedback
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about the California Early Learning System and be prepared for class discussion.
2. Read various approaches to curriculum development and be prepared for class discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write observation notes during lab hours.
2. Write curriculum plans from multiple content areas.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a curriculum resource file and present your file during class.
2. Prepare curricular activities to implement during lab hours.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Mayeski, M.. Creative Activities for Young Children . 10e Edition. Delmar, 2012.
B. Kostelnik, M. Developmentally Appropriate Curriculum . 5e Edition. Pearson, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. California PreK Learning Foundations
B. California Preschool Curriculum Framework
C. California Infant/Toddler Learning Foundations
D. California Infant/Toddler Curriculum Framework
E. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/28/2016

