BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 40 - Observation and Assessment
Prerequisite(s): CDF 14
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
42.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course focuses on the appropriate use of observation and assessment strategies to document
development, growth and play while learning to join with families and professionals in promoting
children's success. Multiple observational formats and assessment tools and methods are explored.
This course includes 25.5 hours of lab observing children in an approved (Butte College or Mentor)
early childhood program. (C-ID ECE 200).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Critically compare the purpose, value and use of formal and informal observation and
assessment strategies.
B. Identify and evaluate logistical challenges, biases and preconceptions about assessing children.
C. Demonstrate systematic observation methods to provide data to assess the impact of the
environment, interactions and curriculum on all domains of children's learning and
development.
D. Assess the value of partnerships with families and other professionals in utilizing interpretations
of observational and assessment data to inform teaching responses and strategies.
E. Demonstrate knowledge of the legal and ethical responsibilities related to cultural and social
contexts within the early childhood education setting.
F. Integrate activities related to observation and assessment into play-based environments,
curricula and care routines for typically and atypically developing children.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction / Orientation, legal and ethical responsibilities
2. Historic and current tools of observation and assessment
3. Basic elements of child development theory related to observation and
assessment including developmentally appropriate assessment
4. Various methods of documentation and recordkeeping (e.g., checklists,
anecdotal records, running records, time samples and family surveys)
5. National and state standards for learning and assessments
6. Observation as part of the on-going process of curriculum and planning
7. Identifying personal biases and other logistical challenges
8. How social context, health, well being and the environment affect
assessment
9. Portfolio collection (e.g., photos, art and writing samples) which makes
visible children's development and learning

Hours
3.00
2.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

10. Curriculum Cycle: How child observation and assessment contribute to
planning curriculum for individuals and groups
11. Utilizing observation and assessment strategies that support appropriate
teaching strategies for dual-language learners
12. Observation and assessment as a tool to create appropriate environments
13. The role of assessment in intervention
14. The value of collaboration with families and other professionals
Total Hours

2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
1.50
42.50

Lab
Topics
1. Course orientation and observation guidelines including legal and ethical
responsibilities and the National Association for the Education of Young
Children (NAEYC) position statement on assessment
2. Adhere to observation and participation guidelines
3. Demonstrate knowledge of confidentiality and other ethical responsibilities
4. Apply basic quantitative and qualitative observation and recording
techniques
5. Utilize observation tools to identify patterns, trends and anomalies in
individuals and groups of children(e.g., Early Childhood Environmental
Rating Scale, Early Language & Literacy Classroom Observation and
Classroom Assessment Scoring System)
6. Utilize observation tools to identify quality in a play-based environment
7. Apply knowledge of developmental domains to interpretation in observation
8. Portfolio collection
Total Hours

Hours
2.00

1.50
3.00
4.00
4.00

4.00
3.00
4.00
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Experience/Internship
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Collaborative Group Work
F. Class Activities
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Demonstrations
I. Multimedia Presentations
J. Observation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Projects
F. Demonstration

G. Lab Projects
H. Observation and Assessment Log Notes
I. Participation/ Timesheets
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and critique sample observation records.
2. Read and critique a sample program assessment.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Incorporate observation records into an individual child study assignment.
2. Observe children and write multiple running records.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview an early childhood administrator regarding the program assessment system.
2. Prepare an individual child developmental portfolio.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Beaty, J. Observing Development of the Young Child, 7th ed.. 7e Edition. Pearson/Merrill,
2010.
B. Wortham, S. Assessment in Early Childhood Education. 5e Edition. Pearson/Merrill, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. California Preschool Learning Foundations
B. Infant/Toddler Learning & Development Foundations

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/28/2016

