BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 133 - Director Mentor Seminar
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: NT
8.5 hours Lecture

0.5 Unit(s)

This course will provide directors, site supervisors, and other administrators of early childhood
programs the opportunity to explore issues related to professional duties, including quality
improvement efforts, advocacy, supervision of staff, and the mentoring of colleagues. Seminar content
will be individualized to meet the needs of participants. This course encourages directors to continue
their professional development and skills. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Utilize the Program Administration Scale to assess the quality of a child development program
and develop a strategic plan.
B. Recommend and facilitate appropriate quality improvement measures for child development
programs.
C. Create an annual budget using standard accounting procedures.
D. Apply ethical and professional standards in assessing the diverse needs of all parties in the
teaching-learning environment.
E. Create center polices regarding health and safety practices for both families and staff.
F. Use a variety of communication tools in marketing child development programs.
G. Use technological resources to operate a child development center more efficiently.
H. Utilize communication strategies to build partnerships with families.
I. Assess the quality of new staff orientation and ongoing staff development.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Program Planning and Evaluation
2. Fiscal Management
3. Center Operations
4. Technology
5. Human Resource Development and Mentoring
6. Family Partnerships
7. Staff Qualifications, Professional Development, and Advocacy
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.50
1.00
2.00
8.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Guest Speakers
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Special Projects
E. Participation in Directors' Retreat
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Study the Program Administration Scale (PAS) and be prepared for seminar discussion.
2. Read professional articles on administration of child development programs and be
prepared to discuss during seminar.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a strategic plan for a child development program including short-term and long-term
goals.
2. Write a paper in which short-term and long-term program goals are examined and
benchmarks toward reaching those goals are added.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Mentor at least one other director/supervisor in the field of early childhood education.
2. Visit other child development programs and interview the directors and/or supervisors.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Talan, T. & Jorde Bloom, P. Program Administration Scale . 2 Edition. Teacher College Press,
2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Director Mentor Handbook

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/05/2012

