BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 55 - ECE Second Language Learners
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides early childhood educators knowledge about the developmental pathways taken
by young second-language learners, the teacher’s role in the classroom, and using appropriate
intervention techniques.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify social and linguistic factors that affect the young second-language learner.
B. Describe the different developmental pathways taken by young second-language learners.
C. Identify several ways to communicate with second-language learners.
D. Communicate with parents about the child’s second-language developmental progress.
E. Create early childhood curriculum and environments to scaffold second-language learners.
F. Identify multiple intervention strategies of the second-language learners.
G. Describe the pathway of bilingualism in a multicultural society.
H. Identify the developmental pathways to becoming bilingual and biliterate
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Second-language learning child
3. Getting started in a second language
4. Individual differences between second and first-language learners
5. The teacher’s role in communicating with the child
6. The teacher’s role in working with parents of second-language learners
7. Using classroom curricula to facilitate second-language learners
8. Assessing the development of second-language learners
9. Developing effective preschool programs for second-language learners
10. Becoming a bilingual and biliterate
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities

Hours
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
6.00
12.00
4.00
51.00

E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
J. Observation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a second language learner's autobiography and be prepared for class discussion.
2. Select current scholarly articles on second language acquisition and write a paper.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create a dictionary of pictures and words in a language other than English.
2. Create curriculum for English language children and learn to modify the activity for
children with a language other than English.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe second language learners in an early childhood classroom or the home to assess
the child's current level of second language acquisition.
2. Observe an infant/toddler or preschool classroom which has second language learners and
interview the classroom teacher.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Tabor, P. One Child, Two Languages. 2nd Edition. Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co., 2008.
B. California Department of Education. Preschool English Learner. 2nd Edition. California
Department of Education, 2008.
C. Trevino Hart, E. Bearfoot Heart. 3rd Edition. Trevino Hart, Elva, 2000.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Articles reflecting current research

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/05/2012

