BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 84 - Administration I: Programs in Early Childhood Education
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the administration of early childhood programs, including program
types, budget, management, regulations, laws, development and implementation of policies and
procedures. The course will examine administrative tools, philosophies, and techniques needed to
organize, open, and operate an early care and education program. This course partially meets the
administrative units required by the State of California to meet licensing requirements and
administrative units for the Child Development Permit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Compare and contrast various program structures, philosophies and curriculum models.
B. Identify strategies to ensure equity and respect for children, families, staff and colleagues.
C. Summarize systems and methods to support sound fiscal operations in a variety of early
childhood education settings.
D. Demonstrate knowledge of compliance with regulatory systems.
E. Assess various methods and tools of evaluation.
F. Examine effective policies and procedures for staffing and scheduling.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction and Review of Course Objectives
2. Overview of responsibilities of administrator
3. Policies, procedures and handbooks
4. Staffing and scheduling
5. Hiring, review and evaluation
6. Working with boards, families and community
7. Advocacy and public policy
8. Strategic Planning (e.g. start-up, needs assessment, marketing)
9. Finances, budget, record keeping, grant writing and fundraising
10. Overview of regulations
11. Title 22, Title 5, Education Code
12. Health and safety codes including playground codes
13. Mandating reporting
14. American with Disabilities Act (ADA)
15. Emergency preparedness
16. U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food services and programs
17. National Association for the Education of Young Children Accreditation

Hours
2.00
1.50
2.50
1.50
1.50
2.00
1.50
6.00
9.00
1.50
1.50
1.50
3.00
1.00
1.50
1.50
1.50

17. National Association for the Education of Young Children Accreditation
(NAEYC)
18. Overview of Program Development
19. Development of program mission, philosophy, and values
20. Program models and approaches (e.g., Montessori, Waldorf, Head Start,
State PreK, Play, Project)
21. Managing the classroom environment (e.g., quaility, diversity, anti-bias,
and inclusion)
22. Program curriculum planning cycle
23. Program evaluation tools
Total Hours

1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
3.00
1.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Class Discussion
F. Program Observation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a personnel policy manual from a child care center and come prepared to discuss its
daily implications in practice.
2. Read and examine the components of a parent handbook and be prepared to discuss the
function of each component.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write 10-12 interview questions for a current child care director and practice their
implementation with a classmate prior to interviewing an director.
2. Construct a teacher schedule based on fictitious enrollment/ratios and be prepared to
justify your choices.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a local licensing office and review a licensing report or attend a child care licensing
orientation meeting and present findings to class.
2. Use quality indicators set by the field of early education to evaluate a child care setting
and be prepared to discuss your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Freeman, N., Decker, C. & Decker, J.. Planning and Administration of Early Childhood
Programs. 10 Edition. Prentice Hall, 2012.

B. Sciarra, D. & Dorsey A. Developing and Administering a Child Care and Education Program.
8th Edition. Wadsworth, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Manual of Policies and Procedures: Child Care Centers (Title 22)
B. Curtis, D. & Carter, M. The Visionary Director: A Handbook for Dreaming, Organizing, and
Improvising in Your Center, 2nd ed. Readleaf, 2009.
C. Harms, T., Clifford, R., & Cryer, D. Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale-3. New York:
Teacher's College Press, 2014
D. Pinata, Robert, Laparo, Karen & Hamre, Bridget. Classroom Assessment Scoring System.
Baltimore: Brookes Publishing

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 02/23/2015

