BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 62 - Creative Art Activities for Children
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course teaches students to plan, prepare and implement the materials and techniques of a creative
art curriculum for young children. The course includes specific techniques for working with children,
parents, and staff, research of the philosophical bases and developmental stages of children’s art, and
preparation and utilization of specific art media appropriate for use in early childhood education
programs.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Discuss the importance of using knowledge of child development and learning when creating,
planning, implementing appropriate art experiences.
B. Critique major artists, artistic styles, artistic elements, and the importance/relevance of
integrating them in a developmentally appropriate early childhood art program for children.
C. Identify the developmental stages and abilities of the young child necessary for planning
developmentally appropriate curriculum.
D. Prepare and evaluate an environment conducive to fostering the child’s creative abilities.
E. Construct and implement various art media used in programs serving young children.
F. Explain the impact of early art experiences on children's development.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction/Orientation
2. Creativity
3. Values of Art Activities
4. Special Needs and Cultural Diversity
5. Developmental Stages in Children's Art
6. Art and Aesthetics
7. Developing an Early Childhood Art Program
8. Environment
9. Material Development and Utilization
10. Art Activities
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
12.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Media Presentations
G. Observations/On-Site Visitations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Written Assignments
C. Class Portfolio
D. In-Class Activities
E. Participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article about the importance of hands-on activities for children and come
prepared to discuss the role of the teacher in those experiences.
2. Read an article about historical art influences (e.g. artists, periods) and come prepared to
discuss their impact on children.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create a curriculum plan utilizing a major period in art history and come prepared to
discuss its implementation with children.
2. Write a research paper discussing the differences between teacher-directed and
child-directed art activities in the child care setting.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a local child care and education center and observe the art program, noting methods
and techniques that can be discussed in class.
2. Visit a museum to gather ideas for future art experiences for children, drawing
connections to material covered in previous coursework.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Schirrmacher, R. & Englebright Fox, J. Art and Creative Development for Young Children. 7th
Edition. Cengage Learning, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Valerie Singleton
Date: 04/02/2012

