BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 131 - ECE Mentor Teacher Seminar
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: NT
8.5 hours Lecture

0.5 Unit(s)

This course provides an opportunity for Early Childhood Mentor Teachers to discuss issues related to
their role as supervisors of early childhood student teachers, plan in-service activities and provide
professional support for one another. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Provide appropriate models, guidance, and evaluation for student teachers.
B. Recognize and support developmental stages of student teachers.
C. Facilitate positive interactions between student teachers, children, parents, and other staff.
D. Maintain a safe and developmentally appropriate environment for young children while
fostering growth of student teachers.
E. Apply ethical and professional standards in weighing the diverse needs of all parties in the
teaching-learning environment.
F. Recognize the importance of professional advocacy in the training of student teachers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Introduction/Orientation
2.
Mentor-Student Relationship
3.
Planning and Scheduling
4.
Modeling
5.
Providing Appropriate Feedback
6.
Professionalizing ECE
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
1.50
1.00
2.00
1.00
8.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Field Experience/Internship
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration

A. Demonstration
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Special Projects
E. Discussion/Participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a current article on approaches to children's learning and development and be
prepared to discuss it during seminar.
2. Read a professional publication and be prepared to discuss it during the next seminar.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create a survey and other assessments forms.
2. Provide and document appropriate feedback in mentoring student teachers.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Plan and participate in a presentation to college students studying in the field of early
childhood education.
2. Plan and participate in presentations on current topics in the field of early education to
early childhood educators.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Mentor Teacher Handbook and/or other materials assigned by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/05/2012

