BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 80 - Health, Safety and Nutrition
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV; Math Level I
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the laws, regulations, standards, policies, and procedures and early
childhood curriculum related to child health, safety and nutrition. The key components that ensure
physical health, mental health and safety for both children and staff will be identified along with the
importance of collaboration with families and health professionals. This course will focus on
integrating the concepts into everyday planning and program development for all children. (C-ID ECE
220).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Assess strategies to maximize the mental and physical health of children and adults in programs
for all young children in accordance with culturally, linguistically and developmentally sound
practice.
B. Identify health, safety, and environmental risks in children’s programs.
C. Analyze the nutritional needs of children at various ages and evaluate the relationship between
healthy development and nutrition.
D. Evaluate regulations, standards, policies and procedures related to health, safety, and nutrition in
support of young children, teachers and families.
E. Distinguish aspects of quality in programs for young children as related to health and safety,
acknowledging the value of collaboration with families and the community.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction and review of course objectives
2. Promoting good health
3. Respecting the cultural, linguistic, and developmental differences of
families, teachers and children
4. Health appraisals and screening tools including mandated child abuse
reporting
5. Communicable and acute illness: Identification, the infectious process, and
effective control
6. Creating safe environments (i.e., safety risks, assessment tools, policies and
procedures)
7. Safety management (e.g., Title 22, Title 5 and fire code)
8. Injury prevention and care
9. Policies and prevention strategies related to child abuse and neglect
10. Common and current health issues (e.g., obesity, asthma, autism and

Hours
3.00
2.00
3.50
2.00
2.50
2.50
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.50

10. Common and current health issues (e.g., obesity, asthma, autism and
allergies)
11. Planning for children's health, safety, and nutrition education.
12. Nutrition guidelines
13. Physical fitness and activity
14. Diet analysis
15. Meal time policies
16. Special considerations for infants and toddlers
17. Food safety
18. Menu planning
19. Responsibilities of teacher as role model of best health, safety and nutrition
practices
20. Collaboration with health care professionals and families
Total Hours

2.50
4.50
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.50
2.50
2.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a series of current professional articles on infectious diseases and be prepared to
discuss in class.
2. Read a series of current professional articles on topics such as feeding young children
and/or menu planning and be prepared to discuss in the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a section of Title 22 pertaining to health issues and submit a summary of the the
section you chose.
2. View a set of videos which critiques routines related to health and including napping,
brushing teeth and toilet learning and respond in writing to a series of reflective questions.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Develop a resource binder of community agencies and resources that are available in the
community.
2. Interview an early childhood administrator regarding nutrition, health and safety policies
and procedures.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Robertson, A. Safety, Nutrition and Health in Early Education. 6th Edition. Cengage, 2016.
B. Sorte, J. Nutrition, Health and Safety for Young Children. 2nd Edition. Pearson, 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Manual of Policies and Procedures: Child Care Centers (Title 22)
B. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 02/23/2015

