BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 65 - Infant/Toddler Curriculum
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

Applies current theory and research to the care and education of infants and toddlers in group settings.
Examines essential policies, principles, and practices that lead to quality care and developmentally
appropriate curriculum for children birth to thirty six months.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Summarize the essential policies, practices, and indicators of high quality infant and toddler
curriculum.
B. Demonstrate strategies to promote healthy relationships and support the unique abilities of all
infants and toddlers in their care and education.
C. Apply current theory and research to develop, prepare, implement, and evaluate
developmentally appropriate curriculum based on observation, documentation, and reflection.
D. Design appropriate play spaces and care routines that support infant and toddler care and
learning.
E. Describe reciprocal communication techniques that promote brain development and healthy
relationships.
F. Demonstrate practices that support and respect the diverse values and beliefs of families and
caregivers.
G. Define infant/toddler program policies of primary care, continuity of care, and small group size
and identify delivery systems, licensing regulations, and quality indicators.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction/Orientation
2. Regulations for Infant and Toddler Programs
a. Delivery systems
b. Licensing regulations
c. Teacher qualifications
d. Quality indicators
3. Culturally Inclusive Approaches to Infant/Toddler Group Caregiving
a. Developmentally, culturally, linguistically appropriate practice
b. Respectful and responsive caregiving strategies and practices
c. Primary caregiving
d. Inclusive care
4. Curriculum and Planning

Hours
3.00
3.00

9.00

9.00

4. Curriculum and Planning
a. The importance of observation and the process of linking observation to
curriculum development
b. Planning for developmental domains; Physical and Cognitive
c. Social
d. Emotional
5. Routines as Curriculum
a. Arrivals and departures
b. Feeding
c. Diapering/toileting
d. Rest/naps
6. Environments
a. Materials and equipment
b. Space and design
c. Aesthetics
d. Adult space
7. California Early Learning System
a.California Infant/Toddler Learning Foundations
b. California Infant/Toddler Curriculum Framework
c. Desired Results Developmental Profile (DRDP) 2015
8. Teacher's role and responsibilities
a. Collaboration and interactions with families and professionals
b. Guidance and interaction
c. Communication with children
9. Assessment and Documentation
a. The importance of reflective practice and assessment
b. Assessment tools
c. Early identification and intervention
Total Hours

9.00

9.00

3.00

6.00

6.00

3.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Media
G. Class Participation
H. Observation and participation in one or more instructor-approved infant and/or toddler
classrooms
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Written Assignments
D. Group Project/Presentations
E. Class Participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS

A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article, "Designing and Using a Developmentally Appropriate Block Area for
Infants and Toddlers," and come to class prepared to discuss the topic.
2. Read the article, "Maximize Your Influence to Make Toddler Mornings Meaningful," and
come to class prepared to discuss the topic.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page, typed, double-spaced paper in which you discuss the role of the
physical environment in influencing the cognitive development of toddlers.
2. Write a two page, typed, double-spaced paper in which you compare and contrast
developmentally appropriate and inappropriate curriculum related to the social and
emotional development of infants.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Based upon your observation of an instructor-approved infant or toddler classroom, plan
and implement a developmentally appropriate activity and present your child outcomes in
class.
2. Conduct a two hour observation in an instuctor-approved infant or toddler classroom.
Observe caregiver practices which support the development of verbal and non-verbal
communication. Take notes of potential barriers to communication. Be prepared to share
your results during class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Petersen, S.H. ; Wittmer, D.S. Endless Opportunities for Infant and Toddler Curriculum. 2nd
Edition. Pearson, 2013.
B. Swim, T.J.; Watson, L. Infants and Toddlers: Curriculum and Teaching. 8th Edition. Wadsworth
Cengage, 2014.
C. Maguire-Fong, M. J.. Teaching and Learning with Infants and Toddlers: Where
Meaning-Making Begins . 1st Edition. Teacher College Press, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. California Infant/Toddler Learning and Development Foundations, California Department of
Education, 2009
B. California Infant/Toddler Curriculum Framework, California Department of Education, 2012

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 05/04/2015

