BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 20 - Curriculum for Children with Special Needs
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers curriculum and intervention strategies for working with children with special needs
in partnership with their families. Focus is on the use of observation and assessment in meeting the
individualized needs of children in inclusive and natural environments. Topics include the role of the
teacher as a professional working with families, collaboration with interdisciplinary teams, and
cultural competence.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate program, educational and professional policies, based on special education laws and
evidenced-based practices.
B. Identify curriculum, environment and natural learning opportunities to meet individualized
needs, outcomes, and goals of young children and families.
C. Design and implement curriculum adaptation based on children's individualized needs in
inclusive and natural environments.
D. Advocate for effective partnerships with families, interdisciplinary team members, and
community resource specialists.
E. Communicate curricular strategies and interventions that support the central role of families and
their collaborative partnerships with team members and community professionals.
F. Demonstrate knowledge of reflective practice, cultural responsiveness, confidentiality, and
professional practices when working with colleagues, children and families.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Special Education for children with special needs
2. Policies and procedures for early intervention and special education
3. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
4. Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) and Individualized Education
Program (IEP) process
5. Early intervention referrals
6. Policy and procedures for least restrictive environment
7. Family rights
8. Working with local public/private school systems
9. Myths about first language learners
10. Advocacy and public policy
11. The role of the Teacher in curriculum and environmental adaptations
12. Philosophical approach to special education

Hours
3.00
3.00
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50

13. Ethics and professional behaviors
14. Collaborating and partnering with family and early
interventionists/specialists
15. Implementation of IFSP/IEPs
16. Adaptations: curriculum and environments
a. Adaptive equipment and materials
b. Routines and schedules
c. Guidance and interactions
d. Challenging behaviors
17. Developmental Screening and Assessment Tools
a. Purpose, value, and use of various tools
b. Role of observation and assessment
c. Referral and placements
Total Hours

1.50
3.00
1.50
12.00

12.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Demonstrations
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Group Participation
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Performance Examinations
I. Case Studies
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a current publication on environmental adaptations for children with special needs
and discuss findings with class.
2. Read an article in a professional publication, and then present current research on usage of
screening systems (i.e., behavioral, speech, cognitive,etc.).
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) or an Individual Education Plan (IEP)
based on an instructor-provided case study.
2. Write a minimum 250 word journal entry after each classroom observation. Identify the
specific curricular and/or environmental adaptations observed.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe an inclusive classroom to learn about curriculum and environmental adaptations

for children with identified special needs. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Interview a family who has a child(ren) with special needs and submit a written paper
addressing the questions generated in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Raver, Sharon A . Early Childhood Special Education - 0 to 8 Years: Strategies for Positive
Outcomes. 1st Edition. Pearson, 2009.
B. Cook, Klein & Chen. Adapting Early Childhood Curricula for Children with Special Needs . 9th
Edition. Pearson, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. DRDP ACCESS

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 02/23/2015

