BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 85 - Admin II: Personnel & Leadership in Early Childhood Education
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: CDF 84 & Reading Level V; English Level IV; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides effective strategies for personnel management and leadership in early care and
education settings. Topics include legal and ethical responsibilities, supervision techniques,
professional development, and reflective practices for a diverse and inclusive early care and education
program. This course partially meets the administrative units required by the State of California to
meet licensing requirements and administrative units for the Child Development Permit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate effective practices for managing and leading staff and administering early care and
education programs.
B. Implement ongoing professional development plans based on evaluation of staff and
administrator needs.
C. Establish professional relationships and facilitate collaboration and communication between
colleagues, families, and stakeholders.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of Administration of Early Childhood Programs
2. Overview of Administrator Responsibilities
3. Overview of hiring, evaluation and termination
4. Overview of Leadership and Professional Development
5. Legal requirements and responsibilities
6. Ethics and professional behaviors
7. Time Management
8. Working with colleagues and families
a. Creating a diverse and inclusive environment
b. Team building strategies
c. Establishing professional relationships and boundaries
d. Communication strategies
e. Dealing with conflict
9. Working with stakeholders
a. Boards (i.e., Parents, Governing, Advisory)
b. Community agencies
c. Other professionals who support the field
d. Seeking and incorporating new ideas
10. Job descriptions
11. Hiring and termination procedures

Hours
3.00
3.00
1.50
1.50
3.00
1.50
1.50
6.00

6.00

1.50
1.50

12. Observations and evaluations
a. Formal and informal
b. Use of evaluation
13. Personnel handbook
a. Compensation and benefits
b. Payroll procedures
14. Development of staff and administrators
15. Modeling and coaching
16. Cultivating leaders
17. Leadership styles
18. Confidentiality
19. Setting priorities between home and work
20. Professional memberships and advocacy
Total Hours

6.00

3.00

1.50
1.50
1.50
3.00
1.50
1.50
1.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Portfolios
D. Oral Presentation
E. Projects
F. Class participation
G. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read personnel manuals from four educational agencies serving young children (i.e.,
private, state, non-profit).
2. Read the National Association for Education of Young Children Code of Conduct for
Administrators to prepare you for in-class case studies group work.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a scholarly article from your course text reference page and complete an analytical
map.
2. Gather three personnel handbooks from four educational agencies and write a two-page
compare and contrast paper.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit and interview a program administrator at a local early childhood program using the
questions created in class. Be prepared to discuss in class.

2. Arrange a day in which you can job shadow an administrator of an early children program
(this day should be at least 5 hours or more). Be prepared to share your findings with the
class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hearron, P.F., & Hildebrand, V.P. Management of Child Development Centers. 8th Edition.
Pearson, 2015.
B. Bruno, H.E. What You Need to Lead an Early Childhood Program: Emotional Intelligence in
Practice. 1st Edition. National Association for the Education of Young Children Washington,
DC, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. National Association for the Education of Young Children Code of Conduct
B. Professional Growth Development Manual from California Commission for Teaching
Credential

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 02/23/2015

