BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 59 - Anti-Bias Curriculum in Early Childhood Programs
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides the opportunity for students to explore issues of cultural diversity, examine
curricular approaches to anti-bias education, and integrate these elements into the development of
comprehensive children's programs. This course also provides the opportunity to explore factors
leading to culturally responsive child care and education.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze and describe the rationale for implementing an anti-bias education program related to
children's optimal development.
B. Identify and describe theories and issues related to the development of cultural identity
including factors such as language, ethnicity, socioeconomic class, religion, gender, and age as
they pertain to curriculum development.
C. Describe professional ethics and responsibilities which pertain to culturally responsive child
care and education.
D. Critically assess the various approaches to developmentally appropriate anti-bias education,
including integrating an anti-bias perspective in curricular preparation and implementation.
E. Develop components of an early childhood program environment which values cultural
diversity and evaluate its potential impact on children.
F. Describe a variety of strategies for culturally responsive care and education.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Rationale for Implementing an Anti-Bias Education Program
3. Theories and Issues Related to the Development of Cultural Identity
4. Professional Ethics and Responsibilities Related to Culturally Responsive
Early Childhood Care and Education
5. The Curriculum Development Cycle
6. Approaches to Incorporating a Developmentally Appropriate Anti-Bias
Perspective in Curriculum
7. Curricular and Environmental Considerations
8. Strategies Which Lead to Culturally Responsive Care and Education
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
9.00
2.00
6.00
6.00
10.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Presentations/Projects/Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read five children's books in which the main character is developing an awareness of self
and come to class prepared to discuss your readings.
2. Read a case study on implementation of anti-bias curriculum in an early childhood care
and education program. Come to class prepared to facilitate a small group discussion
based upon the study.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a Social Studies curriculum plan intended for implementation with preschoolers
utilizing anti-bias principles.
2. Write an essay on the impact of an educator's social identity on his/her implementation of
anti-bias principles in an early childhood care and education classroom.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Evaluate an early childhood care and education classroom focusing on anti-bias
curriculum, materials, and environment. Come to class prepared to give a ten-minute
report of your findings.
2. In collaboration with the members of your assigned workgroup, develop a fifteen-minute
presentation for the class in which social justice in an early childhood care and education
setting is the primary theme.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Robles de Melendez, W. & Beck, V. Teaching Young Children in Multicultural Classrooms:
Issues, Concepts, and Strategies. 4th Edition. Wardsworth Cengage, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Katharine McAfee
Date: 03/05/2012

