BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 48 - Principles and Practices of Teaching Young Children
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an examination of the underlying theoretical principles of developmentally appropriate
practices applied to programs and environments, emphasizing the key role of relationships,
constructive adult-child interactions, and teaching strategies in supporting physical, social, creative
and intellectual development for all children. Early Childhood Education career opportunities and
preparation will be examined. This course includes a review of the historical roots of early childhood
programs and the evolution of the professional practices promoting advocacy, ethics and professional
identity. (C-ID ECE 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Interpret best and promising teaching and care practices as defined within the field of early care
and education's history, range of delivery systems, program types, philosophies and ethical
standards.
B. Identify the underlying theoretical perspective in forming a professional philosophy.
C. Assess early childhood settings, curriculum and teaching strategies utilizing indicators of quality
early childhood practice that support all children including those with diverses characteristics
and their families.
D. Evaluate the value of play as a vehicle for developing skills, knowledge, dispositions and
strengthening relationships among young children.
E. Examine a variety of guidance and interaction strategies to increase children’s social competence
and promote a caring classroom community.
F. Analyze the relationship between observation, planning, implementation and assessment in
developing effective teaching strategies and positive learning and development.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Current and historic models, influences and approaches in the field of early
childhood
3. Program models, types, and approaches (e.g., Montessori, Reggio,
High-Scope, Emergent, Play-Based and Ages/Stages, etc.)
4. Delivery systems and their philosophy (nonprofit, profit, publicly funded
and alternative payment/voucher)
5. An overview of licensing and regulation
6. Professional organizations and ongoing professional development.
7. National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) Code
of Ethical Conduct

Hours
2.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00

8. Play as a vehicle for development and learning
9. Importance of communication, relationships and interactions (e.g., children,
families, colleagues and health professionals)
10. The meaning of DCLAP- developmentally, culturally, linguistically
appropriate practice
11. Principles of positive guidance strategies (e.g., programmatic, curricular and
environmental adaptions)
12. Unique needs of children ages of zero to eight (e.g., infant/toddlers,
preschool aged and in after school care).
13. Quality indicators (e.g., California Early Learning System, Early Childhood
Environmental Rating Scale, Infant and Toddler Environmental Rating
Scale, Family Child Care Environmental Rating Scale and NAEYC
accreditation)
14. Observation, planning, implementation and assessment for effective
teaching
15. Developing a personal philosophy of teaching and researching career
opportunities
Total Hours

2.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
5.50

5.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Observations at Various Types of Programs for Young Children
J. Interviews of Professionals in the Field
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Group Participation
F. Class participation
G. Class Discussion
H. Observations/interviews
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about current approaches in the field of early childhood education.
2. Read about historic models and influences in the field of early childhood education.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a compare and contrast paper based on your program interviews and observations.
2. Research and write a personal philosophy of teaching statement.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a master or mentor teacher and write a paper.
2. Visit an early childhood program to assess the environment and research the program's
approach to learning.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Morrison,G. Fundamentals of Early Childhood Education. 6e Edition. Pearson/Merrill, 2010.
B. Bredekamp,S. Effective Practices in Early Childhood Education. 1e Edition. Merrill, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/05/2012

