BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 78 - Early Childhood Education Practicum
Prerequisite(s): CDF 40, CDF 63
Recommended Prep: CDF 12 and CDF 44 and CDF 57
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This capstone course is a demonstration of developmentally appropriate early childhood teaching
competencies under guided supervision. Students will utilize practical classroom experiences to make
connections between theory and practice, develop professional behaviors and build a comprehensive
understanding of children and families. Child centered, play-oriented approaches to teaching, learning
and assessment and knowledge of curriculum content areas will be emphasized as student teachers
design, implement and evaluate experiences that promote positive development and learning for all
young children. This course includes fifty-one hours of participation with young children in an
approved early childhood (Butte College or Mentor) program. (C-ID ECE 210).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Integrate understandings of children’s needs and development in order to develop and maintain
healthy, safe, respectful, supportive and challenging learning environments for all children.
B. Evaluate the effectiveness of early childhood curriculum, classroom environments, teaching
strategies and how teachers involve families in their children’s development and learning to
improve teaching practices for all children.
C. Design, implement and evaluate curriculum activities that are based on observation,
documentation and assessment of young children.
D. Apply a variety of effective approaches, strategies and techniques supporting positive
relationships with children and adults.
E. Critically assess one’s own teaching experiences to guide and inform practice.
F. Demonstrate the interpersonal skills necessary to successfully participate in an early care and
education setting.
G. Evaluate and utilize a recordkeeping system to document and track children’s progress.
H. Use and articulate current research and understanding of development and learning theories to
select effective learning materials and experiences for young children.
I. Demonstrate professional behavior and preparation for the field of early childhood education
including a written professional growth plan and written and verbal communication skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to course, review of lab procedures, and use of a variety of
technology tools
2. Using and articulating current research and understanding of development
and learning theories.
3. The Curriculum Planning Process

Hours
2.00
6.00
6.00

3. The Curriculum Planning Process

6.00

Observation
Documentation
Reflection and Planning
Implementation
Reflection and Evaluation
4. Integrating curriculum through the learning domains (e.g., aesthetic,
affective, cognitive, language, physical and social) and content areas (e.g.,
language, literacy, mathematics, science, social studies and visual and
performing arts) while meeting individual needs
5. Planning, organizing and implementing of the physical environment and
routines, e.g., small and large group activities
6.
Positive and effective approaches with children and adults
7. Evaluating and guiding a child's learning and development through a
portfolio system
Organizing for assessments
Collecting children's work samples to support learning and
development
Communicating assessment process and results to staff and parents
8. Methods of involving families in the early childhood program
Establishing relationships
Gathering information from families
Keeping families informed
Integrating families into the program
Providing family education
9. Current research on best teaching practices in early childhood and how to
integrate these practices into a professional development skills
10. Program planning for teacher’s day-in-charge
Total Hours

4.00

2.00
6.00
2.00

2.00

2.00
2.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Mandatory orientation for selection of site, introduction of mentor teachers
and scheduling lab times
2. Review of course syllabus including lab guidelines
3. Using current research and learning theories to select effective learning
materials
4. Apply curriculum planning process
5. Demonstrate the integration of curriculum throughout all learning domains
6. Use and apply a portfolio system
7. Engage in family involvement
8. Program planning for teacher’s day-in-charge
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
6.00
10.00
12.00
10.00
3.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Instructor's supervision of students in Butte College Child Development Center or Mentor
Teacher Site.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Lab Projects
F. Performance Examinations
G. Case Studies
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the student lab guidelines of your designated lab site and generate 5-7 questions to
discuss in class.
2. Read the parent information handbook of your designated lab site and generate 5-7
questions to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using knowledge based on the ages and stages of child development and developmentally
appropriate practice, write five curriculum plans in multiple content areas to implement at
your lab site.
2. Write a minimum of 10 anecdotal records of observations at your lab site to assess
children’s abilities for consideration when preparing classroom curriculum plans.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a portfolio from your classroom that demonstrates the skills/ abilities, knowledge,
concepts and theories which are represented in the children's environment and present
your file in class.
2. Using information from your anecdotal records while observing children, prepare five
curriculum experiences (curriculum plan, schedule time/location in classroom, gather
materials, prep space, provide plan/feedback form to Mentor/Master Teacher, other as
deemed necessary) to implement at your lab site.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Tyminski,C. Your Early Childhood Practicum and Student Teaching Experience: Guidelines for
Success . 2e Edition. Pearson/Merrill, 2010.
B. Bredekamp, S., Copple, C. Developmentally Appropriate Practices. 3/E Edition. National
Association for the Education of Young Children, 2009.
C. Williams, A. Williams, G. & Browne,K. To Teach Well in Early Childhood Practicum Guide.
1e Edition. Pearson, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:

A. California Infant & Toddler Foundation
B. California Preschool Learning Foundation
C. California Preschool Curriculum Framework

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/28/2016

