BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 30 - Adult Supervision and Mentoring in Early Care and Education
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: CDF 84 and CDF 85 and Reading Level V; English Level V;
Math Level I
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course examines methods and principles of supervising student teachers, volunteers, staff, and
other adults in early care and education settings. Emphasis is on the roles and development of early
childhood professionals as mentors and leaders.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Compare and contrast methods of supervision for student teachers and others in early childhood
education settings.
B. Critique and practice strategies to support students teachers, volunteers, staff, and other adults in
early care and education settings.
C. Demonstrate reflective practice, cultural competency, and ethical conduct.
D. Apply various personnel, program and environmental tools for assessment.
E. Develop a variety of systems or strategies to facilitate effective communication among staff.
F. Provide professional development activities regarding special issues within programs.
G. Identify characteristics of effective leaders and mentors.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction and Review of Course Objectives
2. Overivew of Leadership and Development of Early Childhood Programs
3. Time management
4. Characteristics of effective mentors/coaches/leaders
5. Theories of adult mentoring, coaching and supervision
6. Diverse perspectives of leadership
7. Adults Learners in Early Care and Education Settings
8. Ethics-professional behaviors
9. Professional development for mentees
10. Program orientation, staff roles and expectations
11. Strategies for positive interactions and communication
12. Coaching strategies for conflict resolution
13. Evaluation and Assessment tools and methods
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.50
1.50
1.50
6.00
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
3.50
3.00
3.00
7.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Case Studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Journal
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
G. Field Observations
H. Mentor Application
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a case study about staff dynamics in early childhood settings and be prepared to
discuss in small groups.
2. Read an article about the value of self reflection in professional development and write
one page about your strengths and one page about your areas of growth as a professional.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a Mentor Teacher application and be prepared to discuss the process with
classmates.
2. Write a two page reflection of the challenges of supervising in an early childhood setting
and identify three meaningful goals for yourself or program.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete an early childhood program observation focused on supervisory strategies and
techniques and come prepared to share your findings with the class.
2. Complete an assessment of an early childhood program that addresses strengths and areas
of improvement and be prepared to compare your findings in small groups.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Chu, Marilyn. Developing Mentoring and Coaching Relationships in Early Care and Education:
A Reflective Approach. 1st Edition. Pearson, 2013.
B. Caruso, J. & Temple Fawcett, M. Supervision in Early Childhood Education: A Developmental
Perspective. 3rd Edition. New York: Teacher’s College Press, 2006.
C. Bloom,P., Hentschel, A., & Bella, J.. A Great Place to Work: Creating A Healthy
Organizational Climate. New Horizons, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Mentor Application
B. Harms, T., Clifford, R., & Cryer,D. Early Childhood- Infant/Toddler- School-Age- Family
Childcare Environment Rating Scales-Revised ed. New York: Teacher’s College Press, 2005

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 02/23/2015

