BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 18 - Children with Special Needs
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: CDF 12 and CDF 14
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces the variations in development of children with special needs birth through
eight, and the resulting impact on families. It also includes an overview of the historical and societal
influences on the laws, identification and referral process relating to children with special needs.
Observations in public or private children’s centers, schools, and agencies are required.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze the sequence of development and the interrelationships among physical, cognitive,
social, emotional, language, and creative developmental areas.
B. Examine the key contributions of developmental theorists, advocates and legal decisions in
influencing best practices in early childhood special education.
C. Summarize the steps in the referral process including observing, documenting, screening, and
assessing young children for special needs or exceptionalities to identify best intervention
strategies.
D. Identify and discuss the role of the teacher, the family, and community resources in developing
an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) or Individual Educational Plan (IEP).
E. Apply knowledge of the National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC)
Code of Ethical Conduct and Statement of Commitment as well as the American's with
Disabilities Act (ADA) within the system of services for children with special needs.
F. Identify the benefits of using a strengths-based approach in working with children with special
needs and their families.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction and Review of Course Objectives
2. Historical Overview of Early Intervention/Special Education
3. Theory/educational foundations
4. Least retricted environment
5. Advocacy and public policy
6. Ethics-professional behaviors
7. Laws and regulations
a. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
b. Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP)
c. Individualized Education Program (IEP)
d. Inclusion
8. Developmental screening and assessments

Hours
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

9.00

8.

Developmental screening and assessments
a. Referral process
b. Community resources
9. Impact on families
a. Grief, stress and coping strategies
b. Supporting families
c. Diverse perspectives
10. Development and variations in development
11. Prenatal development and risk factors
12. Genetically inherited conditions
13. Environmental factors
14. Cognitive
15. Communication/language
16. Social and emotional
17. Mental health
18. Physical
Total Hours

9.00

9.00

1.00
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Classroom Observation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Demonstration
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Observations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article in a professional journal pertaining to ADA and come to class prepared to
discuss.
2. Read the NAEYC Code of Ethical Conduct and Statement of Commitment and come to
class prepared to role play a situation where there is an ethical dilemma for the caregiver.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Summarize in a two-page paper a professional article which discusses research-based
curricular adaptations for children with orthopedic special needs.
2. Write a five-page paper which discusses the IEP or IFSP process focusing on the
strengths-based approach.

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview an individual in the field of special education and come to class prepared to
discuss the interview.
2. Observe an inclusive classroom and come to class prepared to discuss your observation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Mojdeh, B. Teaching Exceptional Children. 12th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
B. Kritikos, E., LeDosquet, P., and Melton, M. Foundations of Assessment in Early Childhood
Special Education . 1st Edition. Pearson, 2012.
C. Coleman, J. The Early Intervention Dictionary. 3rd Edition. Woodbine House, 2006.
D. Yell, M. Law and Special Education, The, Enhanced Perason eText with Loose-Leaf
Version-Access Card Package . 4th Edition. Pearson, 2015.

Created/Revised by: Carrie Roberson
Date: 02/22/2016

