BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 57 - Teaching in a Diverse Society
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the development of social identities in diverse societies including theoretical and
practical implications of oppression and privilege as they apply to young children, families, programs,
classrooms and teaching. Various classroom strategies will be explored emphasizing culturally and
linguistically appropriate anti-bias approaches supporting all children in becoming competent
members of a diverse society. Course includes self-examination and reflection on issues related to
social identity, stereotypes and bias, social and educational access, media and schooling. (C-ID ECE
230).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Critique theories and review the multiple impacts on young children’s social identity.
B. Analyze various aspects of children’s experience as members of families targeted by social bias
considering the significant role of education in reinforcing or contradicting such experiences.
C. Critically assess the components of linguistically and culturally relevant, inclusive,
age-appropriate, anti-bias approaches in promoting optimum learning and development.
D. Evaluate the impact of personal experiences and social identity on teaching effectiveness.
E. Describe the unique and overlapping issues in racism, sexism, classism, heterosexism, ableism
and ethnocentrism as they relate to children and to early childhood settings.
F. Define and assess the impacts of factors such as language, ethnicity, religion, immigration and
economic class in the personal history of the student and the subsequent impact on teaching
young children and families.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to course objectives.
2. Issues of cultural identity including factors such as language, ethnicity,
religion, immigration, and economic class in relationship to children,
families, and early childhood settings.
3. The nature and processes of systemic and internalized privilege and
oppression and their impacts on children’s identity development and
learning.
4. The overt and covert ways in which stereotypes and prejudice are learned.
5. Classroom environments, materials and approaches to effectively promote
pride in one’s own identity and delight and respect for social diversity.
6. Inclusive classroom environments, materials and approaches that are
developmentally, culturally and linguistically appropriate to specific groups
of children.
7. Strategies for helping children negotiate and resolve conflicts caused by

Hours
2.00
5.00

2.00

6.00
12.00
6.00

5.00

7. Strategies for helping children negotiate and resolve conflicts caused by
cultural, class and gender differences, with a focus on using anti-bias
approaches in the classroom.
8. Strategies for creating partnerships with parents through building mutual,
collaborative relationships and to challenge bias and injustice in the lives of
their children.
9. Professional ethics and responsibilities and legal implications of bias,
prejudice and/or exclusion.
10. Teacher’s roles and responsibilities in creating a more just world for every
child.
Total Hours

5.00

5.00

5.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Interviews
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Classroom Observations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Students are expected to read about how to create an anti-bias classroom.
2. Students are expected to read about three or more theories related to the development of
children's social identity.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Students will write a paper that synthesizes the linguistically and socio-economical
challenge for families within the educational system.
2. Students will write about the impact of personal experiences and social identity on
teaching effectiveness.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Students will visit an library and select three or more children's book addressing issues of
diversity.
2. Students will observe children in an early childhood group care setting to investigate
whether the program promotes acceptance of diversity.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:

A. York, Stacey. Roots & Wings: Affirming Culture in Early Childhood Programs, Revised
Edition. 1 Edition. Merrill, 2006.
B. Espinosa, Linda. Getting it RIGHT for Young Children from Diverse Backgrounds: Applying
Research to Improve Practice. 1 ed Edition. Merrill, 2009.
C. Derman-Sparks,Louise. Anti-Bias Education for Young Children and Ourselves. 1 Edition.
National Association for the Education of Young Children, 2010.
D. Copple, Carol. A World of Difference. National Association for the Education of Young
Children, 2003.

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/07/2011

