BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 67 - Math and Science Curriculum for Young Children
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV; Math Level Intro
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course surveys the philosophy, principles, and implementation of math as well as natural and
physical science experiences for young children. Focused on theory of child development, this course
emphasizes the process of observation, assessment and curriculum development related to math and
science for early childhood programs.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Design, prepare and evaluate developmentally appropriate science curriculum for young
children.
B. Design, prepare, and evaluate developmentally appropriate math curriculum for young children.
C. Describe principles and theories of math and science as they relate to early childhood education.
D. Explain the value of math and science experiences as a part of the early childhood curriculum.
E. Assess math and science activities for developmental and age appropriateness for young
children.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation/Introduction
2. Principles and theories of math activities
3. Principles and theories of science activities
4. Value of math experiences in the curriculum
5. Value of science experiences in the curriculum
6. Assessing curriculum and environments for developmental and age
appropriateness
7. Planning and preparing math activities
8. Planning and preparing science activities
9. Implementation of math activities
10. Implementation of science activities
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture

hour of lecture
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article about the value of hands-on experiences for young children and discuss
the value in the childcare environment.
2. Read an article about the importance of natural environments
in learning experiences for young children and identify key factors.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Plan and prepare developmentally appropriate curriculum experiences to implement with
children.
2. Prepare a math or science inquiry related to children's needs or interests and report
findings in an observation report.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Collect natural materials for curriculum activities and come prepared to discuss how they
are developmentaly appropriate for children.
2. Observe science and math environments in at least 2 different early childhood settings and
share potential opportunities and challenges identified to classmates.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Charlesworth, R. & Lind, K. Math and Science for Young Children. 7th Edition. Cengage
Learning, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Carrie Roberson
Date: 04/02/2012

