BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 66 - Literature and Language Arts Curriculum for Children
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides students with skills in preparing, implementing, and evaluating literature and
language arts curriculum for young children. Techniques of reading aloud to children as well as
storytelling and preparation of curricular materials are included. Emphasis is placed on the acquisition
and development of language in the young child.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate methods and materials which foster an effective early childhood literature and language
arts program for all children encompassing listening, speaking, prewriting, writing, and reading
readiness components.
B. Discuss language arts for children as a means of communication and facilitation of social and
emotional growth.
C. Describe how children’s literature and language arts curriculum should be designed,
implemented, and evaluated in an early childhood education setting.
D. Select developmentally appropriate literature and language arts curricular experiences for all
children.
E. Use different techniques in presenting language arts curriculum (e.g., music, drama, puppetry,
and flannel boards).
F. Critically select and evaluate children’s literature.
G. Compare and contrast methods utilized in encouraging the child to be the creator of literature.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Developmental Overview of Language Acquisition and Communication Birth to Eight Years
3. Overview of a Developmentally Appropriate Literature and Language Arts
Program for Children
4. Review of Literary Materials Available for Children
5. The Curriculum Development Cycle
6. Techniques of Reading Aloud and Storytelling
7. Preparation of Literature and Language Arts Curricular Materials
8. Developing and Utilizing a Literacy Rich Environment
9. The Child as the Creator of Literature
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
8.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
3.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Class participation
F. Examinations
G. Reviews of Children's Literatures
H. Presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read five school-age children's books related to developing friendships and come to class
prepared to discuss the main story lines.
2. Read five preschool-age children's books which relate to the development of self-esteem
and come to class prepared to compare and contrast the messages conveyed.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Based upon your reading of two books intended for school-age children which focus upon
the development of friendships, compare and contrast in a two-page paper key elements of
the messages conveyed.
2. Based upon your reading of five books intended for preschoolers related to the
development of self-esteem, write a two-page paper comparing and contrasting key
elements of the messages conveyed.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe a children's story hour at a local library and come to class prepared to discuss
your observaion.
2. Visit an early childhood program, observe story time, and come to class prepared to
discuss your observation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Machado, J. Early Childhood Experiences In Language Arts. 9th Edition. Pearson/Merrill, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Katharine McAfee
Date: 03/26/2012

