BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 61 - Music for Early Childhood
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides the student with the knowledge, methods, skills, and opportunities to develop,
implement and evaluate developmentally appropriate, inclusive musical activities for a diverse
population of young children. Activities and experiences will include the development of musical
games and materials for use with children in the home and/or school environment. A musical
background is not necessary.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Articulate knowledge of the ages and stages of early childhood musical growth and
development.
B. Develop unit and activity plans to include the key musical elements of an early childhood music
program (i.e., singing, playing simple musical instruments, listening, creative/rhythmic
movement).
C. Research, compile, and evaluate resources for the development and implementation of music
curriculum applicable to young children in the home, school, and community.
D. Plan, implement, and evaluate inclusive, developmentally appropriate early childhood music
activities in accordance with the Music Educators National Conference (MENC) and National
Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) standards.
E. Apply various curriculum development methods and techniques through the preparation and
presentation of a variety of musical activities for the young child (e.g., experiences in rhythm,
pitch, melody, tone, creative/rhythmic movement, and dynamics).
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Music for Early Childhood-Birth to Eight Years
3. Methods, Approaches, and MENC/NAEYC Standards
4. Developmentally Appropriate Music Components (e.g., Rhythm, Pitch,
Melody, Tone, and Dynamics)
5. The Curriculum Development Cycle
6. Environmental considerations for structuring a music program for young
children
7. Sharing Music in Groups
8. Music, Language and the Interdisciplinary Approach
9. Spontaneous Music in the Daily Program
10. Diversity in Music Experiences
11. Resources

Hours
1.00
4.00
9.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
1.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Demonstrations
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Portfolios
D. Projects
E. Journal
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Performance Examinations
I. Presentations
J. Curriculum Activity Assignments
K. Resource File
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and be prepared to discuss MENC Standards as they relate to the development an
early childhood music program.
2. Read and come to class prepared to discuss NAEYC standards as they pertain to the
development of musical curricular experiences for young children.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Based upon MENC and NAEYC standards, write a developmentally appropriate
curriculum plan for young children which focuses on creative movement.
2. Based upon MENC and NAEYC standards, write a developmentally appropriate
curriculum plan with a primary emphasis upon the development of listening skills.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview an early childhood program director about his/her philosophy of music
education for young children. Come to class prepared to compare and contrast in a group
discussion his/her philosophy with yours.
2. Visit an early childhood program and observe a musical curricular experience. Come to
class prepared to discuss your observation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Edwards, L. Music and Movement: A Way of Life for the Young Child. 7th Edition. Merrill,
2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Art Kit (markers, crayons, colored pencils, colored and white paper, poster board, glue stick,
scissors, laminating film)

B. Recordings of currently available children's Music.

Created/Revised by: CarolAnn Gardner
Date: 03/26/2012

