BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 34 - The School-Age Child
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course focuses on the development of school-age children (six to twelve years). Physical,
cognitive, language, social and emotional development are explored. Family involvement in education
is stressed as a key component in the process of development and socialization. Emphasis is placed on
the assessment of research and strategies that support the development of the school-age child.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the physical, cognitive, language, social and emotional needs of
school-age children.
B. List and identify the developmental milestones of school-age children.
C. Discuss the importance of family involvement in education as it pertains to the development and
socialization of school-age children.
D. Assess current research and strategies that support the development of the school-age child.
E. Explain the importance of the role of teachers and schools in children's lives.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the School-Age Child
2. Development of the School-Age Child
3. Physical Development
4. Cognitive Development Theories
5. Cognitive Development: Information Processing and Intellectual Theories
6. Language and Literacy Development
7. Self-Concept and Identity Development
8. Motivation
9. Peer Relations
10. Moral Development
11. Family as Partners in Education
12. Supporting the Development of Children in School
13. Contemporary Issues, Research, Resources and Activities
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Class participation
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a professional journal pertaining to family involvement in the education of
school-age children and come to class prepared to discuss how it relates the the child's
socialization process.
2. Choose an elementary grade level and read the California Department of Education
Standards for that grade. Come to class prepared to discuss the Standards and what role,if
any, parents should play in helping their children reach those Standards.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research the topic of the impact of schools upon the development of school-age children
and write a five-page paper summarizing your findings.
2. Based upon your research of the topic, write a five-page paper discussing the teacher's
role in impacting the development of school-age children.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Following appropriate policies and procedures, visit an elementary school and observe
children at play during recess. Come to class prepared to discuss the varying activities and
skill levels observed.
2. Interview an elementary school teacher regarding his/her perspective on the level of
family invovement in his/her classroom. Come to class prepared to present your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Click, P. & Parker, J. Caring for School-Age Children. 5th Edition. Delmar, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Bettye Ann Stephens
Date: 03/26/2012

