BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 14 - Child Growth and Development
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the major physical, psychosocial and cognitive/language developmental
milestones for children, both typical and atypical, from conception through adolescence. There will be
an emphasis on interactions between developmental processes and environmental factors. While
studying developmental theory and investigative research methodologies, students will observe
children, evaluate individual differences and analyze characteristics of development at various stages.
(C-ID CDEV 100).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze major developmental milestones for children from conception through adolescence in
the areas of physical, psychosocial, cognitive and language development using standard
research methodologies.
B. Analyze how cultural, economic, political and historical contexts affect children's development.
C. Compare and contrast various theoretical frameworks that relate to the study of human
development.
D. Apply developmental theory to the analysis of child observations, surveys and/or interviews
using investigative research methodologies.
E. Differentiate characteristics of typical and atypical development at various stages.
F. Analyze the importance of the early years and the interaction between maturational processes
and social/environmental factors as they affect various areas of development.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction / Orientation
2. History and theories of child development
3. Overview of theories in child development including research methods and
findings (e.g., effects of bias).
4. Ways in which developmental domains are continuous, sequential and
inter-related.
5. Sources of developmental changes and disturbances in the developmental
process.
6. Conception, prenatal development and infertility
7. Prenatal development
8. Birth and the neonate
9. Infancy – Physical development
10. Infancy – Intellectual development, language development
11. Infancy – Psychosocial development

Hours
2.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00

12. Preschool – Physical development
13. Preschool – Intellectual development, language development
14. Preschool – Psychosocial development
15. School Age – Physical development
16. School Age – Intellectual development, language development
17. School Age – Psychosocial development
18. Adolescence – Physical development
19. Adolescence – Intellectual development, language development
20. Adolescence - Psychosocial development
21. Abuse/Neglect and other risk factors that impact development
22. Individual differences with children with special needs
23. Family structures; roles and individual differences
Total Hours

2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Observation: Students will observe children in an instructor-approved
facility/environment/experience.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Essays and research papers
H. Observation Reports
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Locate two scholarly articles on attachment theory. Read the articles and write a paper on
attachment theory.
2. Select a major child development theorist and complete a scholarly literature review.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After reading multiple scholarly articles on attachment theory, summarize the scholarly
articles in a two-page paper using APA format.
2. Select a major theorist in child development and summarize the theorist in a paper using
APA format.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments

1. Interview children using a set of Piagetian questions about the physical world. Record
each child’s responses and synthesize the findings.
2. Following appropriate procedures. Go to a local preschool or elementary school to observe
children at play. During your observation use Parten’s and/or Piaget's play categories.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cook, G.; Cook, J. Child Development, Principles & Perspectives. 2/e Edition. Pearson
Education, 2009.
B. Rathus, S. Childhood and Adolescence. 4/e Edition. Thomson Wadsworth, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts, supplementary materials and Internet websites
B. My Virtual Child (a web based program)

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/05/2012

