BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 12 - Child, Family, and Community
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an examination of the socialization of the developing child in today's society,
emphasizing the important influences of family, community, school, and historical and socio-cultural
factors. The processes of socialization and identity development will be highlighted, showing the
importance of respectful, reciprocal relationships that support and empower families. (C-ID CDEV
110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze theories of socialization that address the interrelationship of child, family, and
community.
B. Critically assess how educational, political, and socioeconomic factors directly impact the lives
of children and families.
C. Synthesize and analyze research regarding social issues, changes and transitions that affect
children, families, schools, and communities.
D. Describe effective strategies that support and empower families through respectful, reciprocal
relationships to involve all families in their children’s development and learning.
E. Critically assess community support services and agencies that are available to the community
and families.
F. Analyze one’s own values, goals, and sense of self as related to family history and life
experiences, assessing how this impacts relationships with children and families.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction of course objectives
2. History and theories of the developing family
3. The Diverse Family: structure, parenting styles, culture, economics and
stress management strategies
4. Theories, goals, values, and culture of the family
5. The role of child care, schooling and community in the socialization
process (e.g., stereotypes, single parenting, socioeconomic, health and
poverty)
6. The impact of change and transition on children and families
7. Effects on the developing child (e.g., age, gender, education, language,
racial identity, ethnicity, socio-economic and other risk factors)
8. Community agencies and resources
9. History of one's own family (e.g., language, socio-economic status,

Hours
1.50
3.00
9.00
9.00
6.00

4.00
3.00
6.00
3.00

9. History of one's own family (e.g., language, socio-economic status,
communication and support systems)
10. Legal requirements and ethical responsibilities of professionals working
with families
11. Advocacy on behalf of children and families
Total Hours

3.00
3.50
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Find an article on a topic pertaining to the course from a current journal, magazine,
newspaper or website. Thoroughly read the article, then summarize and evaluate the
article in a report.
2. Read the National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) Code of
Ethical Conduct and be prepared to discuss the major points in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Find an article on a topic pertaining to the course. Summarize and critique the article in a
written report.
2. Write a one page diversity statement.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Develop a community resource file and collect resources from a variety of local agencies.
2. Conduct an interview with a representative from a local community agency.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Berns, R. Child, Family, School, Community: Socialization and Support . 9th Edition. Cengage,
2013.
B. Gonzalez-Mena, J. Child, Family & Community. 7th Edition. Pearson, 2015.
C. Barbour,C.,Barbour, N. & Scully P. Families, Schools and Communities. 6th Edition. Pearson,
2015.

Created/Revised by: Carrie Roberson
Date: 02/22/2016

