BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 44 - Positive Child Guidance
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course teaches students guidance methods and techniques that are effective in the home,
classroom and other group settings. Students will learn positive guidance techniques to promote
socially responsible behavior and healthy emotional development in children from birth to eight years
of age.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the major theories of behaviors.
B. Identify and use effective guidance methods and techniques.
C. Recognize and describe typical and atypical social and emotional behaviors.
D. Demonstrate the ability to create enviroments to promote developing social and emotional skills.
E. Differentiate between feelings and behaviors.
F. Identify and compare behavior modification and problem-solving techniques.
G. Gather information to promote healthy social and emotional development and to educate
families using positive guidance techniques.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. History of and introduction to positive guidance
2. Theories of the young child's social and emotional development
3. Risk factors related to healthy social development
4. Parenting styles
5. Building relationships with children
6. Protective factors
7. Behavior and the brain
8. Reframing attitudes of positive guidance
9. Understanding families
10. Understanding culture
11. Positive approach in teaching social and emotional skills
12. Preventing challenging behaviors in the home or classroom enviroments
13. Preventing challenging behaviors in the social context
14. Guiding young children using a democratic approach
15. Guiding young children with natural and logical consequences
16. Guidance vs. punishment

Hours
2.00
4.00
6.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
1.00

17. Techinques of positive guidance
18. Functional assessment
19. Educating families and other experts
Total Hours

1.00
4.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Problem-Solving Sessions
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Projects
D. Demonstration
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Class Discussion
H. Case Studies/Presentation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read five articles on guidance of young children from professional publications and write
a paper.
2. Read children's literature which has social and emotional content and be prepared to share
in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a one-page reflective journal from your selected articles.
2. Complete a parent conference form that includes information from your observations and
data from the parent survey questions.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe an early childhood classroom to identify teacher interactions which promote
emotional literacy.
2. Visit an early childhood classroom environment and locate materials that support social
and emotional development.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Kaiser, B. & Sklar Rasminsky, J. Challenging Behavior in Young Children: Understanding,
Preventing and Responding Effectively. 3rd Edition. Pearson Education, 2012.
B. Gartrell,D. A Guidance Approach for the Encouraging Classroom. 5 Edition. Wadsworth, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Website: Center on the Social and Emotional Foundation for Early Learning

A. Website: Center on the Social and Emotional Foundation for Early Learning
http://csefel.vanderbilt.edu/

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 03/05/2012

