BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 56 - Prenatal, Infant, and Toddler Development
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of infants and toddlers from prenatal to age three including physical, cognitive,
language, social and emotional growth and development. Throughout the class, students will apply
theoretical frameworks to interpret behaviors and interactions between heredity and environment
while emphasizing the role of family and relationships in development.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze the multiple contextual influences on prenatal, infant and toddler development
including the developmental domains and processes during pregnancy, birth, and the first three
years.
B. Use current research to analyze and evaluate the biological and environmental factors that
influence growth and development from prenatal through 36 months of age.
C. Identify and describe developmental appropriate approaches to infant care through the first year
of life, including: the stages of infant development, the nutritional and health needs of a
pregnant and lactating mother and her baby, facilitating secure attachment through responsive
and consistent caregiving, and designing a safe and developmentally appropriate environment.
D. Examine various caregiving practices and environments that support the optimal development
of diverse families.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of Developmental Theory and Processes
2. Current Research
a. Brain development
b. Social development
c. Influences on growth patterns
d. Early intervention
3. Developmental Domains and Processes
4. Prenatal development and birth
a. Preconception influences
b. Conception
c. Prenatal development
d. Birth
5. Physical development
a. Brain development
b. Health and nutrition
c. Growth patterns
6. Cognitive development

Hours
6.00
6.00

3.00
6.00

6.00

6.00

6.

Cognitive development
a. Sensorimotor stages
b. Information processing
c. Language development
d. Theories of language development
e. Multi-language learning
f. Critical periods
7. Social and emotional development
a. Attachment
b. Reciprocal relationships
c. Psychosocial theory
d. Temperament
8. Variations in Development
9. Influences on Development
a. Family
b. Cultural perspectives
c. Care settings
e. Routines and schedules
Total Hours

6.00

6.00

3.00
9.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a current professional article or journal on the history of childhood immunizations
and be prepared to discuss your findings with the class.
2. Read a current professional article or journal on the ecological influences on development
and be prepared to discuss with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read an instructor provided article on variations in development between families and
write a two-page paper that explains which family most closely represents your family and
why.
2. Watch the video "Together In Care" and write a 250 word essay explaining what have you

learned about caregiving practices and environments that support optimal development.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe a program serving infants and toddlers in your community and come to class
prepared to discuss your findings.
2. Visit and interview a nurse working in the local Newborn Intensive Care Unit (NICU) and
be prepared to share what you have learned about this special type of care for prematurely
born children.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Wittmer, D. S. Infant & Toddler Development . 3rd Edition. Pearson, 2013.
B. Gonzalez-Mena, J. Diversity in Early Care and Education: Honoring Differences . 5th Edition.
McGraw-Hill, 2011.
C. Gross, D. Infancy Development from Birth to Age 3. 2nd Edition. Pearson Education Inc. Allyn
& Bacon, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Terri Hutton
Date: 02/23/2015

