BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CDF 36 - Working With School-Age Children
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the role of adults in school-age children’s socialization and development inside
and outside of the classroom. Building from a foundation of theory, students will identify the
increasing role schools and communities play in providing support to children and their families.
Career options and requirements and the roles of the professional working with school-age children
will be examined. Standards and strategies necessary to develop and sustain high-quality school-age
activities and programs will be stressed.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Distinguish among the various roles of adults in school-age children’s socialization and
development.
B. Explain the major theories of child development as they relate to the school-age child.
C. Describe the increasing role schools and communities play in providing support to children and
their families.
D. Identify various career options and define the roles of professionals working with school-age
children.
E. Assess standards and strategies necessary to develop and sustain high-quality programs and
activities.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Working with School-Age Children
2. Theories of School-Age Child Development
3. School-Age Child Socialization and Development
4. Adult Roles in Fostering Socialization and Development
5. Career Options/ Requirements for Working With School-Age Children
6. School-Age Programs
7. Contemporary Issues Facing Today's Children
8. Understanding and Guiding Behavior
9. Play and Learning
10. School-Age Curriculum
11. Partnerships with Families and the Community
12. Administration of Programs (Policies/Procedures, Personnel, Issues,
Program Planning)
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Homework
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article about the importance of appropriate guidance and discipline for the
school-age child and come to class prepared to discuss the topic.
2. Read an article about a contemporary issue related to the care of school-age children and
come to class prepared to present your findings to the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a letter to a professional in the field addressing the needs of the school-age child.
2. Write a reflection of the challenges you face in working with school-age children.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a professional working in the field with school-age children about the
challenges and rewards of working with this age group and come to class prepared to
participate in a panel discussion.
2. Following established policies and procedures, observe the indoor environment of a
school-age program and compare it to the School-Age Environmental Rating
Scale-Revised criteria. Come to class prepared to discuss your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bumgarner, M. Working With School-Age Children. 1st Edition. Pearson, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Katharine McAfee
Date: 03/26/2012

