BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CHEM 21 - Organic Chemistry I
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture
102 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This is the first course in a year-long study of organic chemistry designed for students majoring in
chemistry and related science disciplines. It covers fundamental principles of organic chemistry
including structure, nomenclature, conformational analysis and stereochemistry. The physical
properties, reactions and reaction mechanisms of alkanes, alkyl halides, alcohols, ethers, alkenes,
alkynes, and allylic systems are studied. Infrared spectroscopy and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy are discussed in detail. (C-ID CHEM 150 & 160S). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate a basic understanding of the fundamental principles and concepts of modern
organic chemistry.
B. Use the vocabulary of organic chemistry.
C. Demonstrate analytical and problem solving skills in predicting the structure of the products for
an organic reaction.
D. Demonstrate an ability to develop the methods of synthesis of organic compounds.
E. Demonstrate laboratory skills or employ standard laboratory techniques toward the synthesis,
analysis, and purification of organic compounds.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review of general chemistry concepts (Lewis structures, acid-base
principles, intermolecular forces, kinetics and equilibrium)
2. Alkanes and Cycloalkanes
3. Stereochemistry
4. Nucleophilic Substitution Reactions of Alkyl Halides
5. Elimination Reactions of Alkyl Halides
6. Alcohols, Ethers and Epoxides
7. Infrared Spectroscopy, Hydrogen and Carbon NMR Spectroscopy
8. Alkenes
9. Alkynes
10. Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
11. Radical Reactions
12. Allylic Reactions
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
6.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
1.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
51.00

Lab
Topics
1. Lab Exercises on Conformations, Isomerism, and Anti-Elimination with E2
reactions
2. Molecular Modeling to support IR Spectroscopy
3. Lab Exercises on NMR Spectroscopy
4. Thin Layer Chromatography
5. Unknown Identification using Gas Chromatography (GS), Boiling Point
and Solubility
6. Recrystallization
7. Macroscale Distillation of Mixtures
8. Steam Distillation
9. Liquid-Liquid Extraction
10. Synthesis and Analysis of the Products of Dehydration and Substitution
Reactions
11. Analysis of Unknowns using Functional Group Tests and IR and H-NMR
Spectroscopy
Total Hours

Hours
15.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
9.00
21.00
9.00
102.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Demonstrations
C. Laboratory Experiments
D. Laboratory Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
unit of credit.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Written Examinations
C. Laboratory reports, notebooks and exercises
D. Laboratory Exam
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section on alkane conformations and Newman projections in the textbook. Be
prepared to relate these ideas to a lab activity involving rotational energy diagrams.
2. Read the section on tree diagrams in the textbook (for predicting splitting in H-NMR
spectra) and be prepared to draw these in class and on exams.
B. Writing Assignments
1. For the experiment on distillation, create a properly formatted entry in your lab notebook
(1-3 pages). The entry should include a title, date, introduction, detailed procedure in third
person passive voice, data, observations, graphs and a conclusion. This entry will be
graded along with your lab report.
2. Write a paragraph that explains why 2-bromobutane undergoes a slower SN2 reaction with
cyanide ion than does bromomethane. Include appropriate drawings and diagrams with
your answer.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments

1. Read the required sections in the laboratory technique book on thin layer chromatography
(TLC), and complete the 1-page pre-lab assignment. You will be asked to perform
calculations of retention factor (Rf) and explain why a filter paper is used inside the TLC
chamber.
2. In order to prepare for the exam, complete the 7-page homework assignment on organic
redox reactions involving alcohols and alkenes.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Smith, J.G. Organic Chemistry. 4th Edition. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2013.
B. Pavia, D.L. A Microscale Approach to Organic Laboratory Techniques. 5th Edition. Cengage
Learning, 2012.
C. Nichols, L.M. CHEM 21 Laboratory Manual. Current Edition. Butte College (publisher), 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Laboratory Notebook with non-removable pages
B. Molecular Model Kit

Created/Revised by: Lisa Nichols
Date: 04/20/2015

