BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CHEM 2 - General Chemistry II
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture
102 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This course is a continuation of CHEM 1, General Chemistry I. Topics include chemical kinetics and
equilibrium, acid-base and solubility equilibria, thermodynamics, oxidation-reduction,
electrochemistry, coordination compounds, nuclear chemistry, introduction to organic chemistry and
qualitative analysis. This is the second semester of a one-year course in chemistry intended for majors
in the natural sciences (chemistry, biochemistry, biology, physics, pre-medicine), mathematics, and
engineering. The two-semester sequence of CHEM 1 and CHEM 2 provides the basic chemical
background needed for further investigations into our physical environment. (C-ID CHEM 120S)
(C-ID CHEM 120S = CHEM 1 and CHEM 2). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate basic experimental knowledge by employing standard laboratory techniques for
data gathering, judging the accuracy and reliability of data, creating informative graphs, and
discussing the limitations of experimental designs.
B. Demonstrate basic analytical skills by interpreting graphs and schematics and diagnosing
realistic physical problems.
C. Demonstrate conceptual understanding by being able to describe qualitatively the underlying
causes of basic physical and chemical phenomena.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Chemical Kinetics
2. Chemical Equilibrium
3. Acids and Bases
4. Applications of Aqueous Equilibria: Buffers and Titrations
5. Applications of Aqueous Equilibria: Solubility and Complex Ion Equilibria
6. Spontaneity, Entropy and Free Energy
7. Electrochemistry
8. Descriptive Chemistry
9. Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
10. Nuclear Chemistry
11. Organic Chemistry
Total Hours
Lab

Hours
6.00
5.00
6.00
5.00
3.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
5.00
5.00
3.00
51.00

Topics
1. Organic Chemistry Background for Lab Research
2. Research Methods Project: Physical Properties of Organic Liquids
3. Research Methods Project: Spectroscopy and Spectrometry of an Organic
Compound
4. Research Methods Project: Chemical Analysis of Organic Compounds
5. Research Methods Project: Written Reports
6. Research Methods Project: Group Analysis and Reporting
7. Research Methods Project: Oral Reports
8. Kinetics of a Chemical Reaction
9. Chemical Equilibria: Determining K; LeChâtelier's Principle
10. Acid-Base Titrations and Properties of Salts and Buffers
11. Thermodynamics and Spontaneity
12. Electrochemistry and Galvanic Cells
13. Inorganic Qualitative Analysis
14. Complex Ions and Inorganic Synthesis
15. Redox Titrations
16. Nuclear Chemistry: Measuring Types of Radiation
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
12.00
3.00
6.00
12.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
9.00
3.00
6.00
18.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
102.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Reading Assignments
C. Laboratory Experiments
D. Demonstrations and visual aids
E. Directed discussions
F. Laboratory exercises
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
unit of credit.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Written examinations
C. Laboratory reports and exercises
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section on integrated rate laws in the text, and be prepared to participate in
discussions of the derivation of these laws and be able to apply them to zero, first and
second order reactions.
2. In your text, read the sections on the common ion effect and acid/base equilibrium. Be
prepared to answer examination questions regarding applications of the common ion
effect, in particular with respect to determining the acid dissociation constant, and the pH
of buffered solutions.
B. Writing Assignments
1. For the experiment to determine the rate law for a chemical reaction, create a properly
formatted report in your lab notebook. The report must include the title, date, any

partners, a clear statement of purpose, an overview or procedure, complete data results
tables, and a conclusion based on your observations.
2. For the experiment to determine the Ka of a weak acid, write a report that includes a
purpose, your relevant data, appropriate graphs, any results from your research and your
conclusions based on those results.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. After reading the experiment for determining the rate law for a chemical reaction,
complete the prelab and use the method of initial rates to calculate the order of the
reaction with respect to the assigned species.
2. After reading the experiment for determining the acid dissociation constant for a chemical
reaction, complete the prelab and calculate the Ka for a reaction using the graph of a
titration curve.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Zumdahl, S.S. & Zumdahl, S.A. Chemistry. 9th Edition. Brooks Cole, Belmont, CA, 2013.
B. Wren, A., Sincoff, S., & Wannenmacher, E.. Laboratory Manual for General Chemistry-CHEM
2. Current Edition. Butte College Department of Physical Sciences, Oroville, CA, 2015.

Created/Revised by: Kristin Milinkevich
Date: 04/20/2015

