BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CHIN 1 - First Semester Chinese
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is a study of beginning Mandarin Chinese emphasizing grammar, reading, writing,
listening and speaking. It also introduces the student to various aspects of the Chinese culture. Chinese
history, traditions and culture will be woven throughout the content of the course. Students who have
completed at least one, but fewer than two years of high school Chinese (or equivalent) with a letter
grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present date, should register for Second Semester Chinese.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. recognize and begin to imitate Chinese pronunciation
B. comprehend basic Chinese at the introductory level
C. speak basic Chinese at the introductory level
D. write basic Chinese at the introductory level
E. formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition
F. identify and understand aspects of Chinese culture presented in all the course topics
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Chinese-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1.
Pronunciation
2.
Pinyin system
3.
Writing and reading characters
4.
Greetings and farewells
5.
Personal and familial descriptions
6.
Indicating dates and times
7.
Calligraphy
8.
Expressing hobbies and plans
9.
Cultural customs and holidays
10. Pronunciation
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
10.00
6.00
12.00
6.00
6.00
8.00
8.00
6.00
74.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Chinese except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read sections of The Chinese Mind: Understanding Traditional Chinese Beliefs and Their
Influence on Contemporary Culture; determine the author's theses and evaluate the
effectiveness of his arguments.
2. Review and critique existing Chinese-American literature related to student topic areas of
interest.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write 3-5 pages, evaluating and identifying different Chinese customs and holidays, which
possess cultural significance.
2. Analyze a journal article about the progress, involvement, and expansion of the Chinese
economy and culture in the world at large, critically evaluating current events relating to
China’s global involvement.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read material from the textbook and, where appropriate, refer to other sources such as
periodicals, videos, and online websites in order to answer questions and engage in
discussions about the differences in perspectives (e.g. related to worldviews, time, as well
as professional ambition) between the Chinese and American cultures.
2. Research the influence of Chinese immigration in California (and specifically in Butte and
Glenn counties).
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Yuehua, Lui & Daozhong Yao. Integrated Chinese, Level 1, Part 2: Simplified character edition.
3rd Edition. Cheng & Tsui, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

