BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CHIN 2 - Second Semester Chinese
Prerequisite(s): CHIN 1
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the second half of beginning Chinese, which further develops the skills of
understanding, speaking, reading, and writing Chinese. It continues to introduce students to various
aspects of Chinese culture. Students who have completed at least two, but fewer than three years of
high school Chinese (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present
date, should consult the appropriate language instructor before enrolling.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. recognize and imitate Chinese pronunciation with greater clarity.
B. comprehend basic Chinese at the introductory level.
C. speak basic Chinese with greater complexity that at the level one.
D. write basic Chinese at the introductory level.
E. formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition.
F. identify and understand aspects of the Chinese culture presented in all the course topics.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Chinese-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Pronunciation
2. Pinyin System
3. Reading and writing characters
4. Telephone expressions and etiquette
5. Chinese education and academic life
6. Diary entries and written correspondence
7. Chinese currency and business interactions
8. Customs and traditions
9. Friends and family
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
10.00
6.00
12.00
6.00
6.00
8.00
8.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Chinese except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review and critique existing Chinese-American literature related to student topic areas of
interest.
2. Read sections of The Chinese Mind: Understanding Traditional Chinese Beliefs and Their
Influence on Contemporary Culture; determine the author's thesis and evaluate the
effectiveness of his arguments.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze a journal article about the progress, involvement, and expansion of the Chinese
economy and culture in the world at large, critically evaluating current events relating to
China’s global involvement.
2. Write 3-5 pages, evaluating and identifying different Chinese customs and holidays, which
possess cultural significance.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the influence of Chinese immigration in California (and specifically in Butte and
Glenn counties).
2. Read material from the textbook and, where appropriate, refer to other sources such as
periodicals, videos, and online websites in order to answer questions and engage in
discussions about the differences in perspectives (e.g. related to worldviews, time, as well
as professional ambition) between the Chinese and American cultures.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Yuehua, Liu & Daozhong Yao. Integrated Chinese, Level 1, Part 2: Simplified character edition.
3rd Edition. Cheng & Tsui, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 04/30/2012

