BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CLP 334 - Workforce Readiness Strategies
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
48 hours Lecture

0 Unit(s)

This course will help students develop attitudes, behaviors, and professional skills that contribute to
personal success in work and life. Topics may include strategies that positively impact
self-management and self-motivation, including self-assessments, workforce readiness skills,
analyzing workplace skills, and personal wellness. Topics may include analyzing workplace skills and
skill sets; identifying and seeking job opportunities that match current skills sets; writing an
introductory cover letter; constructing a resume and master application; interviewing and keeping a
job. Since skills/proficiencies are enhanced by supervised repetition and practice, this course may be
repeated three times. Ungraded.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and apply skills related to personal development and workforce readiness through
self-assessments.
B. Identify obstacles related to work and life choices through goal setting and application of critical
thinking skills and reflection.
C. Identify soft skills and hard skills as they apply to goal setting, making decisions, and exhibiting
a positive attitude toward work.
D. Practice basic skills for workforce readiness.
E. Analyze personal responsibility for choices, motivation, self-management, interdependence,
self-awareness, and emotional intelligence with relationship to the workplace and personal life.
F. Apply basic concepts of communication to the workplace.
G. Demonstrate presentation skills for job seeking, interviewing and negotiating.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction, course objectives and expectations
2. Personal and workplace skills evaluation
3. Understanding job descriptions and job duties
4. The job search: accessing resources to find work.
5. Job Search Resources: Walk-In, Newspaper, and Electronic Searches
6. The application
7. Resumes
8. Cover letters
9. Interviewing
10. Follow-up
11. Remaining employed and promotion

Hours
3.00
4.00
2.00
5.00
1.00
4.00
10.00
5.00
10.00
1.00
1.00

11. Remaining employed and promotion
12. Networking
13. Educational Training Opportunities
Total Hours

1.00
1.00
1.00
48.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Demonstrations
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Guest Speakers (county, community organizations, employers)
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Completion of written assignments (resume, cover letter)
B. Demonstrated basic skills competencies in areas toward workforce preparation (interview skills,
job search techniques, communication skills, positive work attitudes, resource development).
C. Practical evaluations (job skills, work history, strengths, limitations, mock interviews)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read handout, "Most Often Asked Interview Questions". Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read pages 78-84 from the "California Career Planning Guide" on non-traditional work.
Identify non-traditional work opportunities in Butte County.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a sample thank you note as follow up to an interview.
2. Based on your work history, education and skills, write a resume to use in your job search.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research five companies you would like to interview. Share the results of your research in
class.
2. Identify three companies you want to work for. Be prepared to share the information in
class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Reference Materials
B. Computer Software
C. Navigating the Internet (CALJobs, on-line applications)
D. Videos
E. Personal Inventories

Created/Revised by: Jo Anna Birdsall
Date: 04/04/2016

