BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CLP 30 - Career Life Planning
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a comprehensive career life planning course with a focus on self-exploration, career
exploration, decision making and goal setting, job search strategies, and understanding the world of
work in our global economy. Through self assessment students will learn about their interests,
personality styles, values, transferrable skills, natural talents and strengths, lifestyle, learning styles,
communication styles, and career fitness.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explore one's social, psychological, and physiological self in relation to careers and career
planning.
B. Identify and evaluate local, state, national, and global labor market trends.
C. Apply knowledge of one's values, interests, personality style, skills, learning styles, and lifestyle
to education and career planning decisions.
D. Apply knowledge of communication styles and skills in personal, professional and social
settings.
E. Identify one's learning style and skills, and the connection between learning styles and brain
hemisphere dominance.
F. Evaluate and analyze the educational requirements of specific majors and careers.
G. Research and evaluate careers, jobs, employers, industries, and labor market trends using online
resources and by completing informational interviews.
H. Create effective resumes, cover letters, and job applications; demonstrate appropriate
interviewing skills; and describe effective networking and job search strategies.
I. Identify and apply principles related to personal lifelong social, psychological and physiological
wellness.
J. Utilize emerging technologies for self-exploration, career information, and job search strategies.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Course expectations and overview
2. Work and labor market trends
3. Elements of career and life planning = integrating self awareness, social
skills and personal health for lifelong fulfillment
4. Self-assessment of one's values, interests, personality style, skills, wellnes,
and learning styles
5. Communication skills for personal, social and professional relationships
6. Technology for self-exploration, career information and job search strategies
7. Career research detailing educational and training requirements, skills,
salaries and labor market

Hours
1.00
4.00
3.00
6.00
2.00
2.00
6.00

8. Informational interviewing, communication styles, and personal
presentation (clothing, hygiene, relational skills)
9. Evaluating self-knowledge, personal/professional goals, and career
information related to decision making
10. Job search skills
11. Personal and psychological impact of stress in the workplace: strategies for
personal and professional stress management and wellness
12. Career success skills, time and financial management
13. Career maintenance and advancement
14. Putting it together - writing a plan for an integrated approach to career and
life
Total Hours

3.00
4.00
6.00
2.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Research Activities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Essays and research papers
F. Worksheets and reports
G. Workbook Activities
H. Practical Evaluation (i.e., informational interviews)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about a current career trend online and summarize it to share in class.
2. Read about a specific career of your choice on the EUREKA career information system
online and be ready to share and discuss it in the next class meeting.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After completing your career assessments including an interest inventory and personality
assessment, write about the career and educational paths reported and how they relate to
you.
2. After completing your career assessments including an interest inventory and personality
assessment, write about a career path you might pursue, specifically addressing the
physical and/or psychological stressors related to that profession. Discuss how you can
use your particular interests and personality preferences to address these stressors
proactively.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using the strategies presented in class, schedule and complete an informational interview

1. Using the strategies presented in class, schedule and complete an informational interview
for career information.
2. Watch three career videos featured by an industry of your choice on the website
roadtripnation.com and write a summary of what you learned about the careers including
what you like most and what you like least about each career.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Sukiennik, D., Bendat, W., & Raufman, L. The Career Fitness Program: Exercising Your
Options. Tenth Edition. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2012.
B. Ducat, D. Turning Points: Your Career Decision Making Guide Plus NEW
MyStudentSuccessLab 2012. Prentice Hall, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Career activity workbooks (i.e. CLP 30)
B. Personal preference inventories (may include interest, aptitude, personality, value, skills,
learning styles, communication styles,and lifestyle)
C. Reference Materials
D. Online Resources

Created/Revised by: Deborah Bachman
Date: 12/03/2012

