BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CLP 300 - Career Development
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
30 hours Lecture

0 Unit(s)

This course facilitates individual career growth. Topics include career planning theories, work
motivation, self-assessment, career-success skills, career research, workforce preparation and
readiness, and employment opportunities. Since skills/proficiencies are enhanced by supervised
repetition and practice, this course may be repeated three times. Ungraded. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and assess individual preferences and priorities for career exploration.
B. Review and understand the effect of personal preferences on selection of educational major,
career choice and employment opportunities.
C. Conduct occupational and work preparation research.
D. Demonstrate problem solving and job readiness skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The decision making process: assessing and setting goals
2. Identifying and prioritizing personal and professional preferences
3. Career research
4. Choosing a career
5. Choosing a major of study
6. Career and life success skills
7. Changing careers: assessing why, when, where and how
8. Work motivation and job retention
9. Professional development across a lifespan
10. Leadership development concepts
11. Networking: self-branding, informational interviews, internships,
community service, and mentoring
12. Job searching in a new era
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments

Hours
2.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
30.00

E. Instructor/student conferences
F. Individual assessment(s)
G. Research Activities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Class Discussion
E. This is an individualized, competency based, personal growth class. The instructor and student
will identify specific learning outcomes to be achieved. Individual learning plans will be used to
detail activities and time expected to achieve objectives. Competency for each objective will be
based on evaluation of completed activities. Learning plans may be modified to reflect changing
student needs. Examples of learning plans will include completion of assessment(s), completion
of career-life success skill inventories, contact with employers as part of job search and
informational interviews completed.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “Goal-Setting: Developing a Vision & Goals for Your Career Plan” from
UCBerkeley.edu, and prepare to discuss parts of your career vision statement. What were
some of your challenges in establishing long-term goals?
2. Read “Job Networking Tips: How to Find the Right Job by Building Relationships” from
HelpGuide, and prepare to discuss the importance of networking, and share your game
plan and reach-out strategies.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Based on the results of your assessment(s) and your inventory of career skills, list the jobs
you want to explore and address why you chose those particular positions.
2. Complete 3 informational interviews. In your journal, reflect on your experience with
each informational interview. What information did you gain from the informational
interviews? How will this information help you in your job search? What are your next
steps in finding the job you want?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete student/instructor selected on-line career assessment(s).
2. Part of making career choices includes identifying and prioritizing career-life success
skills. Complete the career skills inventory in preparation for the individualized learning
plan.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. “Job Networking Tips: How to Find the Right Job by Building Relationships,” John E. Kobara,
2015, Help Guide: http://www.helpguide.org/articles/work-career/job-networking-tips.htm
B. “Goal-Setting: Developing a Vision & Goals for Your Career Plan,” UC Berkeley, Human
Resources Department, 2015:
http://hrweb.berkeley.edu/learning/career-development/goal-setting/career-plan-vision
C. Preference Inventories
D. Computer Programs
E. Videotapes
F. Guest Speakers
G. Reference Materials
H. On-Line Resources

Created/Revised by: Jo Anna Birdsall
Date: 04/04/2016

