BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 13 - Gender and Communication
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to gender-related communication, integrating theory and practice in
order to heighten awareness of the importance of gender as a communication variable. Emphasis on
perception, verbal, nonverbal similarities and differences are examined in interpersonal, small group,
and public settings.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Recognize the relationship between gender and communication.
B. Demonstrate sensitivity to gender differences and similarities in the communication process.
C. Distinguish between gender and sex as social constructs and explain their impact on
communication behaviors.
D. Describe the influence of gender on communication in a variety of contexts such as family, the
workplace, and public contexts.
E. Identify the basis for actual and perceived gender differences in communcation.
F. Define and identify concepts in communication theory.
G. Evaluate how language and nonverbal communication are affected by gender.
H. Identify and utilize the most useful principles and methods to study gender and communication,
including research in the disciplines of communication studies, gender studies, social
psychology, and sociology.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to gender and communication
2. Approaches to the study of gender differences
3. Self-perception of women and men
4. The language of gender
5. Gender differences in nonverbal communication
6. Gender and communication in intimate contexts
7. Gender and communication in public contexts
8. Maintaining and modifying gender roles
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work

Hours
6.00
7.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
8.00
6.00
51.00

D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Problem-Solving Sessions
I. Reading Assignments
J. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter on gendered verbal communication and come prepared to
discuss the difference between "rapport" and "report" talk (i.e. feminine vs. masculine
communication styles) and to provide specific examples of each.
2. Using the Butte College online databases, research at least three periodicals that report
about gendered prescriptions/roles from a culture other than the United States. Come
prepared to discuss your findings and how they relate to anthropological theories of
gender.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Gender (sometimes bender) Smile Experiment: Depending on the gender with which you
identify, conduct a smile experiment by breaking the non-verbal expectation for that
gender. Record the results and analyze the consequences in a 2-3 page essay, reflecting
both on the act of smiling and the expectations and consequences of gendered non-verbal
communication. If you incorporate outside sources, be sure to cite and reference per
current APA guidelines.
2. Choose an artifact from pop culture (e.g. advertisement, movie, webpage, song, music
video, etc.) and use at least four course concepts (e.g. nonverbal elements, stereotypes of
men and women, etc.) to critically analyze its gendered components (e.g. Does the artifact
perpetuate or challenge gendered stereotypes?) Conclude with a discussion of the
implications of your findings. The paper should be 3 – 4 pages in length, typed and
double-spaced. Cite and reference per current APA guidelines.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch the documentary “Killing Us Softly IV” and answer a list of questions related to the
video (i.e. Why did Kilbourne begin this video series? What are the consequences of the
objectification of women and their bodies?).
2. His/Her Timeline: Read Chapter 3: The Rhetorical Shaping of Gender--Women’s
Movements in America and Chapter 4: The Rhetorical Shaping of Gender—Men’s
Movement in America. With a partner create a timeline including the important dates and
descriptions from both movements. Timelines can be created electronically or hand-made.
They will be posted in the classroom! Creativity is key! Be sure to include images, color,
etc. Timelines will be graded on content and originality. NOTE: The purpose of this
assignment is to see if there are any interesting connections between both movements, to
notice if each affected the other.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Wood, Julia, T.. Gendered Lives: Communication, Gender and Culture. 9th Edition. Thomson
Wadsworth, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Tough Guise [Video]. (1999). Media Education Foundation. 26 Center Street Northampton,
MA. 01060.
B. Still Killing Us Softly IV: Advertising's Image of Women [Video]. (2010). Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge Documentary Films.

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 04/02/2012

