BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 4 - Small Group Communication
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is the study of theory and research findings and their application to communication in
small group contexts. It emphasizes group discussion for problem solving, leadership, listening,
information gathering, analysis and public speaking. This class is designed to be experiential and
exposes students to small group communication theory and public speaking fundamentals within the
context of their own small group interactions, activities and presentations in classroom settings and
real-world environments. (C-ID COMM 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use creative and critical thinking techniques to effectively solve problems.
B. Demonstrate understanding of conflict management.
C. Recognize and develop communication competencies that contribute to effective leadership and
followership.
D. Organize a variety of public presentations.
E. Conduct research and analysis to formulate effective small group presentations in public
settings.
F. Demonstrate appropriate verbal and nonverbal delivery including the use of presentational aids.
G. Demonstrate effective listening.
H. Analyze and adapt group presentations to the communication situation, audience, occasion and
purpose.
I. Practice ethical and mindful communication.
J. Identify, describe and apply appropriate small group theory and concepts used in group
interactions.
K. Present their views with persuasive force.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Course Overview/Communication Competence
2. Importance of Small Group Communication
3. Small Group Development
4. Providing and Receiving Feedback for Content and Form
5. Organizing, Evaluating, and Reporting Information Orally and in Writing
6. Effective Listening
7. Communication and Leadership
8. Problem-solving
9. Decision Making
10. Persuasion

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

11. Conflict Management
12. Oral Group Presentations
Total Hours

6.00
12.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Demonstrations
H. Problem-Solving Sessions
I. Reading Assignments
J. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Homework
F. Group Participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter on Communication Competence in Groups and be prepared to
discuss communication myths, communication defined, and achieving effective
competence in communication group situations.
2. Read and analyze "hard copies" or online versions of at least 3 brochures and pamphlets
from local non-profit organizations. Bring to class examples of the mission statements and
vision statements you found most appealing. Be prepared to work in your small groups to
define your group's mission and vision.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Each student will prepare a report based on research presented in a scholarly journal.
Using the Butte College online databases, locate and read a study that is relevant to the
material being covered in class. After reading the study, each student will prepare a 3-4
page report that should be approximately evenly divided into the following sections: a
summary of the study, a section relating the study to class material, and a section relating
the study to personal small group experience.Cite and reference the journal article using
current APA guidelines.
2. View and analyze a full-length, feature film that relates to some aspect of small group
communication. Based on your analysis, write a 3-4 page paper that should: 1. Summarize
the film. Give a brief overview of the setting, the plot, and any other relevant information
necessary to describe the context for understanding the small group communication
dynamics in the film. 2. Relate the film to class and textbook material. Does the film
confirm or contradict information from our text? Discuss at least three (3) specific small
group communication concepts from our text and relate them to the film. Be sure to

directly connect specific examples from the film with the concepts from the text. 3.
Provide an overall assessment of the film. Argue whether the film portrays positive or
negative representations of small groups. Cite and reference all work using current APA
guidelines.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. The purpose of this assignment is to create a group identity and help you get acquainted
with the members of your semester-long small group. The assignment requires your group
to meet socially outside of class for at least an hour. Your group will also need to decide
on a name for your group, a logo, and plan a presentation explaining your name, logo and
social activity to the class. Groups should also explain some of the differences and
similarities among group members. Groups also need to explain how groups can be
helpful in engaging in civic engagement and civil discourse. Group members will receive
a group grade for this assignment.
2. Each student will attend a real-world small group meeting such such as a city council
meeting, and prepare a brief 2-3 page analysis paper of the group dynamics using small
group concepts discussed in class and in the text book. Cite and reference all work using
current APA guidelines. Be prepared to discuss your findings in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Dan Rothwell. In Mixed Company. 8th Edition. Wadsworth Cengage, 2010.
B. Adams, K., & Galanes, G. J. . Communication in groups. 8th Edition. McGraw Hill, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 12/02/2013

