BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 2 - Public Speaking
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is the study of the fundamentals of public speaking with an emphasis on extemporaneous
style delivery. Focus is placed on critical thinking including: the organization of ideas, the use of
research, the development of critical analysis in the construction and consumption of messages and the
practice of ethical and mindful communication. (C-ID COMM 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Organize a variety of public presentations using informative and persuasive organizational
patterns.
B. Conduct research and analysis using credible sources to formulate effective messages.
C. Demonstrate appropriate verbal and nonverbal delivery in a variety of public speaking
situations.
D. Analyze the communication situation, audience, occasion, and purpose for a variety of public
presentations.
E. Practice ethical and mindful communication.
F. Utilize effective strategies to manage communication apprehension and improve communication
competence.
G. Demonstrate that they are careful and critical thinkers and communicators, both as speakers and
as listeners.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the principles of human communication
2. Theory and techniques of public speaking in society
3. Critical analysis of public discourse
4. Types of public speaking
5. Listening skills
6. Elements of effective public speaking, including analysis of communication
situation, ethics, and diversity, audience, occasion, purpose, selection of
subject matter, research, evidence evaluation, organization, presentation
skills, and evaluation of communication effectiveness.
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
27.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Peer-to-peer feedback and evaluation of presentations
J. Speeches: A minimum of 3, 4-10 minute speeches, with a minimum of one informative, one
persuasive
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Demonstration
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Written or Oral Examinations
I. Speech critiques
J. 2500 word writing requirement will be met through: Essays, critiques, exams, and formal
outlines
K. Speech presentations: A minimum of 3, 4-10 minute speeches, in front of a live audience with a
minimum of one informative, one persuasive
L. Speech outlines and bibliographies
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Using the Butte College online database "CQ Researcher," locate and read the pro and con
side of a current controversial issue. Come prepared to discuss the article and its value as a
possible source for a persuasive speech.
2. Read the chapter on using evidence and come to class with at least two examples of each
type of evidence listed. (Examples, testimony, and statistics). Bring your APA style guide
and be prepared to complete source citations and referencing in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Based on the information and examples provided in class and in the textbook chapter on
Outlining, prepare a formal, full-sentence preparation outline including minimum of 4
sources 2 of which are from academic journal articles, with corresponding references per
APA guidelines, for a 5-7 minute informative speech.
2. View your own videotaped performances and/or review peer and faculty feedback sheets
and prepare a 3-4 page critical analysis self reflection paper of your growth and
development as a public speaker. Support your analysis with at least 3 citations from your
textbook. Cite and reference using current APA style guidelines.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. You and your partner(s) will need to identify and understand the Transactional
Communication Model. You will/may need your textbook and possibly a little research.

You will then bring to class, for display throughout the semester, your creation of the
Model. You may build or create this artifact as you choose so long as you include all of
the parts of the Model and have them clearly labeled or illustrated in some way. Draw a
picture, use crayons, use clay, use cardboard, design an activity for use in class, invent a
game and/or use technology. Whatever approach you decide is fine as long as we can
“display” it in the classroom for the entire semester. Have fun! Be colorful! Be creative!
Work together.
2. Attend a public speaking event (or watch a pre approved video performance) and prepare
a 2-3 page evaluation of the presentation from an audience perspective. Did the
presentation work? Why or why not? Be sure to support your analysis with details from
the actual presentation and connect your findings to textbook terms and recommendations.
Cite using APA current guidelines.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lucas. The Art of Public Speaking. 10th Edition. McGraw Hill, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 10/20/2014

