BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 12 - Forensics (Speech and Debate)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
25.5 hours Lecture
76.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course prepares students for intercollegiate speech and debate tournaments and/or community
events. Preparation includes practice, research, writing and participation in a variety of public
presentations. Community events, as well as forensics events, such as debate, platform, limited
preparation, oral interpretation, and readers' theatre are emphasized. (C-ID COMM 160B). Since
skills/proficiencies are enhanced by supervised repetition and practice, this course may be repeated
three times.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate improvement in the preparation and presentation of formal debate and/or
individual events in competition.
B. Develop and apply analytical and critical thinking abilities to the areas of literature, public
speaking, and debate.
C. Demonstrate knowledge of tournament organization, categories of competition, and
requirements for each individual event.
D. Demonstrate information competency related to research and preparation within the context of
community events and/or intercollegiate speech and debate.
E. Write for the ear (spoken word) as well as for the eye (written word).
F. Integrate constructive criticism from a variety of sources including coaches, peers, tournament
judges, and self-reflection for the purpose of content and delivery improvements.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of forensics including debate formats, platform events, oral
interpretation events, and/or community events
2. Communication ethics and torunament/ team etiquette
3. Information competency and researching for speech and debate events
4. Applying communication theories and principles to forensics and/or
community events
5. Debate
6. Platform speaking
7. Limited preparation speaking
8. Oral interpretation
9. Using constructive criticism for improvement
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
1.50
25.50

Lab
Topics
1. Researching for event participation
2. Practicing with coaches and peer coaches for competitive forensics and/or
community event participation
3. Participating in competitive forensics and/or community events
4. Post-event peer- and coach-guided evaluating and reflecting
Total Hours

Hours
16.00
30.00
24.00
6.50
76.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Field Trips
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Demonstrations
I. Reading Assignments
J. Multimedia Presentations
K. Peer evaluations
L. One-to-one coaching
M. Guided experience (performance before audience in Butte classes)
N. Performance in intercollegiate speech competitions and/or public events
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Oral Presentation
C. Demonstration
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Evaluation of on-campus activities by instructor
G. Performance evaluation by professional judges at intercollegiate tournaments and/or public
events
H. 1500 word writing requirement met through: critiques, preparation of forensic and community
event presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the online article "Building Team Cohesion: Becoming 'We' instead of 'Me'" located
on the National Forensics website and analyze their own behavior in relation to the
author's argument and come to class prepared to discuss.
2. Read the Emory Debate Manual provided electronically via blackboard and come
prepared with questions related to Parliamentary Debate.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Construct "stock" issue responses by analyzing various debate propositions and
constructing affirmative and opposing cases for policy and non-policy topics.

2. View video taped performances, analyze critical feedback from judges, peers and coaches
and prepare a self-evaluation paper.
3. Research relevant social problems and prepare a 10 minute competitive platform event
with accompanying speaking outline and references.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View your own videotaped performances and/or selected award winning forensics videos
and/or community events for the purposes of analyzing and improving individual
performances.
2. Participate in at least one forensics tournament competing in a minimum of two or more
events such as debate and impromptu speaking or platform speaking, impromptu and oral
interpretation of literature.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Current event publications, sample speeches, instructor-created resources, or other materials as
assigned by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 02/06/2012

