BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 9 - Intercultural Communication
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides an understanding of the dynamics of intercultural communication.
Students will develop knowledge, attitudes, and skills to become more effective intercultural
communicators. (C-ID COMM 150).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Recognize and articulate how core values, worldviews, and communication patterns shape
cultural and individual identities.
B. Identify the components of culture and communication and their interrelationship.
C. Explain how culture influences verbal and nonverbal communication.
D. Compare and contrast cultural communication behaviors in various contexts.
E. Identify and describe barriers to effective intercultural communication such as stereotyping,
prejudice, and ethnocentrism.
F. Analyze and describe the ethical considerations that impact intercultural citizenship.
G. Recognize social and psychological variables of culture and its expression.
H. Explain how culture influences perceptual differences and interpretations.
I. Recognize elements of common ground among diverse cultures.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding Intercultural Communication
2. Perception and Worldviews
3. Culture, Communication, Context, and Power
4. History and Intercultural Communication
5. Identity
6. Language and Intercultural Communication
7. Nonverbal Codes and Cultural Space
8. Understanding Intercultural Transitions
9. Popular Culture
10. Intercultural Relationships
11. Culture Communication and Conflict
12. International Cultures- Understanding Diversity
13. Intercultural Communication Competence
14. Ethical Considerations
15. Barriers to intercultural communication including ethnocentrism,

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00

15. Barriers to intercultural communication including ethnocentrism,
stereotyping, prejudice, discrimination, power and culture shock.
Total Hours

6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Group Participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “On the Invisibility of Privilege” from Dr. Peggy McIntosh. Analyze your own
behavior in relation to the author’s argument and come to class prepared to discuss.
2. Read Chapter 1 from Understanding Intercultural Communication by Leeva Chung and
Stella Ting-Toomey. Consider the components of flexibility in intercultural
communication. How can you balance being yourself with adapting to another
individual’s cultural values and behaviors? Be prepared to discuss your answers in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a 3-4 page paper, view and analyze a full-length, feature film that relates to some aspect
of intercultural communication. Your paper should summarize the film and give a brief
overview of the setting, the plot, and any other relevant information necessary to describe
the context for understanding the intercultural communication dynamics in the film. Be
sure to relate the film to class material. Does the film confirm or contradict information
from our text? Discuss at least three (3) specific intercultural communication concepts
from our text and relate them to the film. Be sure to connect specific examples from the
film with the concepts from the text. Finally, provide an overall assessment of the film.
Argue whether the film helps inform intercultural communication, or constrain it (by
perpetuating negative stereotypes, for example.)
2. Prepare a report based on research presented in a scholarly journal. You must first locate a
study that is relevant to the material being covered in class. After reading the study, you
will prepare a 3-4 page report that should be approximately evenly divided into the
following sections: a summary of the study, a section relating the study to class material,
and a section relating the study to personal experience. Cite and reference all work using
current APA guidelines.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. This assignment is designed to bring awareness of diversity on campus and in our
communities and to foster tolerance in our society and empathy in our relations with
others. Each group will create an interactive project that helps to reach this goal. Projects
will be displayed in the student center in conjunction with other campus activities, such as

Diversity Days and International Education Week.
2. View “Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People.”
Do you agree with the statement that Arabs are “the most maligned group in the history of
Hollywood”? What other groups of people have also been depicted negatively in
Hollywood films? What are some consequences of negative media representation? What
images come to your mind when you think of Arab men, women, and children? Are those
images different after seeing this film? Why or why not? How do you think these films
might shape perceptions of the United States in the Arab world, especially among young
people? In 500- 750 words (2-3 pages), respond to these questions.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Chung, L. C. & Ting-Toomey, S. Understanding Intercultural Communication. 2 Edition.
Oxford University Press, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 12/02/2013

