BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 2H - Honors Public Speaking
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2 or concurrent enrollment and Admission to the Honors
Program
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This is an Honors level introductory Public Speaking course. Through a process of thorough analysis,
critical thinking, extended discussions, and original oral and written responses, students will study the
fundamentals of extemporaneous public speaking. Emphasis is placed on the organization of ideas,
the use of research techniques, and the development of critical analysis for problem solving. (C-ID
COMM 110). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze and synthesize significant global ideas and primary original works and writing.
B. Demonstrate critical thinking skills in seminar-type discussions.
C. Demonstrate advanced writing skills and critical, creative thinking in composing a minimum of
5,000 words in analytical papers and reading responses.
D. Generate creative, original responses to course material.
E. Identify basic principles of rhetoric, and apply methods for composing and organizing public
speeches.
F. Demonstrate self confidence when confronted by the task of public speaking.
G. Compose creative, original speeches by applying fundamental skills necessary in the
informative and persuasive modes of public speaking.
H. Integrate the qualities of clarity, vividness, and appropriateness in oral communication, and
control of the non-verbal elements involved in public speaking.
I. Demonstrate greater control of the vocal factors of public speaking such as audibility, clear
pronunciation, and good vocal quality.
J. Demonstrate critical thinking skills when conducting both audience and situational audience
analysis to prepare speeches.
K. Analyze and synthesize primary works (i.e. speeches) by applying the appropriate skills in
listening, analytical and critical thinking.
L. Demonstrate the ability to transmit maximum information in a minimum amount of time
through organized, clear public speeches.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction, orientation to class procedural methods, examination of the
communication process.
2. Strategies for dealing with speech apprehension and speech practice.
3. Factors in improving listening skills; critical listening.
4. Selecting topics and finding material; writing the specific purpose and
thesis statement.

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

5. Analyzing the audience, organizing the speech.
6. The complete outline: preparing the body, introduction and conclusion.
7. Creativity in public speaking: language choice, metaphor, visual image, and
vocal evocation.
8. Practice research methods.
9. Principles of informative speaking.
10. Principles of persuasive speaking.
Total Hours

6.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
9.00
12.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Peer evaluation
I. Exercises: i.e. interviews, impromptu speeches, simulations, etc.
J. Speeches: A minimum of 3, 4-10 minute speeches, with a minimum of one information, and one
persuasive.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Speech outlines
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Students are expected to read college level materials. Readings may include a course text
as assigned by instructor, periodicals, handouts, and/or a combination of these works
which requires individual comprehension at both a factual and interpretive level.
2. Read an historical speech and be prepared to argue its effectiveness based on content,
organization and audience analysis.
3. Review sample speech outlines provided by the instructor. Be prepared to discuss and
evaluate the merits and demerits of each.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Review three of your taped speeches and write a 2 -3 page essay, analyzing content,
organization and delivery of each speech. Strengths and weaknesses should be evaluated,
along with methods for improvement.
2. Write an essay critically evaluating a persuasive message (i.e. campaign speech,
advertisement, website, etc.) using logos, ethos, and pathos as units of analysis to
determine the effectiveness of the argumentation (3 - 4 pages).
3. Using the basic speech model, create a preparation outline (full-sentence/detailed x3),
including in-text citations and an attached reference page (2 - 4 pages).

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice both verbal and nonverbal delivery for each of five assigned speeches.
2. Attend a speechmaking event in the community in order to analyze the speech for a
writing assignment.
3. Research topics and prepare content for each of five assigned speeches (i.e. outlines).
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Nelson, P., Titsworth, S. & Pearson, J. iSpeak: Public Speaking for Contemporary Life. 3rd
Edition. McGraw Hill, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Presentational aid resources.
B. Other various electronic resources.
C. Additional Materials: Academic writings/research from discipline specific journals (e.g. Journal
of Applied Communication Research; Communication and Society)
Access to original works (speeches):
Print indexes:
Index to American Women Speakers 1828-1978
Speech Index
An index to collections of world famous orations and speeches through 1980.
We shall be heard: An index to speeches by American women, 1978 to 1985
Updates Index to American women speakers, 1828-1978.
Web Sources:
American Memory historical collections (http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/index.html)
contain selected documents from important events in the history of the United States. To find
texts of speeches, search addresses.
Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the United States (http://www.bartleby.com/124/)
History Channel: Speeches (http://www.history.com/search?search-field=speeches)
Hear recordings of famous speeches from the twentieth century.
Online Speech Bank (http://americanrhetoric.com/speechbank.html)
White House Home Page (http://www.whitehouse.gov/)
Press releases, policy briefings, and speeches may be found at this site.

Created/Revised by: Laura Rapozo-Davis
Date: 12/06/2010

