BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 1 - Introduction to Communication Studies
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of the discipline of communication studies with emphasis on multiple issues
relevant to the systematic inquiry and pursuit of knowledge about human communication. It explores
the basic history, assumptions, principles, processes, variables, methods, and specializations of human
communication as an academic field of study. (C-ID COMM 180).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain and apply basic concepts of the field of communication.
B. Discuss the history of the study of communication.
C. Critically discuss and write about human communication theories and events.
D. Compare and contrast the basic research methods for the evaluation of human communication
phenomena.
E. Explain the contextual, cultural and social foundations of human communication.
F. Demonstrate a basic knowledge of the specializations comprising the communication discipline.
G. Demonstrate an understanding of ethical perspectives in communication.
H. Summarize and explain an expanded world perspective that demonstrates an appreciation of the
diverse range of individuals, communities, and viewpoints.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Foundations - Definitions and Context
2. History of Communication Study
3. Verbal and Nonverbal Communication
4. Survey of Basic Communication Theory
5. Basic Communication Research Methods
6. Specializations:
a. Rhetoric
b. Forensics
c. Argumentation
d. Persuasion
e. Public Communication
f. Mass Communication
g. Interpersonal Communication
h. Group Communication
i. Intercultural Communication
j. Gender Communication
k. Organizational Communication
l. Oral Interpretation/Performance Studies

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
8.00
6.00
19.00

m. Communication Ethics
n. Emerging Specializations:
Health Communication
New Technologies
Computer Mediated Communication
Humor Communication
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Group Participation
E. Research Papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. After reading and discussion about gender communication styles come up with your own
examples (at least three - be specific) of how "rapport" is different from "report" talk (i.e.
feminine vs. masculine communication styles). Be prepared to share with the class and
discuss.
2. After reading the chapter and journal article about basic communication research, choose
a field of study within the discipline and in a 500 word essay, explain the process a
communication researcher would follow from initial idea to finished project.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a minimum 500 word essay comparing and contrasting the role of women and
public discourse in society today with those of women from 5th century BCE Greece.
2. After exploring the various specializations within communication studies, choose one to
further research. Using the Butte College Library online databases, locate at least three
academic journal articles that develop your understanding of the specialization in the field
of communication studies. After reading the articles, prepare a 750 word essay that
explains your rationale for choosing the topic, summarizes the articles and research
findings, and finally, speculates what might be a future research area for consideration.
Cite and reference the journal articles using current APA guidelines.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. After the reading and lecture about nonverbal communication, keep a 5-day journal in
which you comment daily on nonverbal behaviors you noticed in others and yourself.
2. After watching one of the films listed below, create a PowerPoint or Prezi slide that
depicts with words and images how the film comments about the ways in which corporate
managers make decisions without regard for the negative consequences to their

employees, consumers, or the general public. Include references to the reading and
discussion about Organizational Communication.
Erin Brockovich, The Informant, Roger and Me, Silkwood, Enron: The Smartest Guys in
the Room.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Trenholm, S. Thinking through Communication. 7th Edition. Pearson, 2013.
B. Tubbs,S. Human Communication, Principles and Contexts. 13th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2112.
C. Wood, J. Communication Mosaics. 7th Edition. Wadsworth, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Jan McKissick
Date: 04/28/2014

