BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 10 - Interpersonal Communication
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is the study of theory and research findings and their application to communication in
interpersonal relationships in personal and professional contexts. It examines effective and appropriate
uses of verbal and non-verbal messages in the initiation, development, maintenance, and termination
of interpersonal relationships. (C-ID COMM 130).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply specific behavioral techniques for improved communication.
B. Demonstrate an increased understanding of the basic principles involved in interpersonal
communication, including cultural and social awareness.
C. Recognize verbal and non-verbal elements of interpersonal communication.
D. Demonstrate an understanding of ethical interpersonal communication founded on
communication theory and research.
E. Analyze self and others' communication competencies in interpersonal relationships.
F. Demonstrate appropriate conflict resolution in interpersonal relationships.
G. Analyze the connection between identity and communication.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Communication
2. Importance of Interpersonal Communication
3. Culture and Gender
4. Communication and the Self
5. Interpersonal Perception
6. Language
7. Nonverbal Communication
8. Listening
9. Emotion
10. Interpersonal Communication in Friendships and Professional Relationships
11. Interpersonal Communication in Romantic and Family Relationships
12. Interpersonal Conflict
13. Deceptive Communication
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Projects
F. Demonstration
G. Homework
H. Class participation
I. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter on "Understanding the Self" and come to class prepared to
discuss three key ideas that you found meaningful.
2. Using the Butte College online databases, locate and read an article by Daniel Goleman
on Emotional Intelligence. Come prepared to discuss the article and how it relates to
interpersonal relationships.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a 5-7 page paper focused on your own communication competency that addresses
issues and improvements with one relationship as observed over the course of about 3-4
weeks. This paper should include your reasons for the behaviors of focus, the methods for
improvement, the observations and the outcomes. This should be supported with at least
one peer-reviewed journal article and further supported with your use of textbook key
terms, ideas, and concepts from at least 5 chapters. Cite and reference all work using
current APA guidelines.
2. Prepare a 2-3 page essay that compares and contrasts how you manage your identity in
face-to-face interactions with how you manage your identity presented during mediated
interactions. Using current APA guidelines, cite and reference key terms and ideas from
the textbook.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Assess your online image by typing your name in quotation marks into google.com and
explore the first dozen websites that the search finds relevant to you. Complete the 10
question survey and come to class prepared to discuss your findings and actions.
2. For 3-4 days, you will intentionally change the channels of communication you regularly
use. For example, rather than communicating with a friend via your “normal” method of
texting, you might call that person instead. Or, you might hand write a thank you card
instead of emailing, or make a personal appearance versus showing up on Facebook. Use
your columned page completed earlier as a guide. Keep detailed notes about what

happens. You will share in class and use this information in the "channels" paper.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Floyd. K. Interpersonal Communication. 2nd Edition. McGraw Hill, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Various electronic resources

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 04/02/2012

