BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 14 - Argumentation and Debate
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course presents basic argumentation theory including research, methods of analysis, use and tests
of evidence, refutation, and the logical and ethical responsibilities of advocacy. Emphasis is placed on
the preparation and presentation of cases for and against propositions or points of view through debate
and public address. (C-ID COMM 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Critically evaluate reasoning and evidence.
B. Present written and oral arguments effectively and persuasively.
C. Analyze, advocate, and criticize ideas through the process of debate.
D. Research current issues in society for logical cogency.
E. Identify fallacies in civic discourse.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Philosophy of argumentation
3. Analysis
4. Research
5. Evidence
6. Reasoning
7. Logical fallacies
8. Speech of analysis
9. Refutation and rebuttal
10. Speech of advocacy
11. Psychological aspects of argumentation/advocacy situations
12. Debate theory
13. Debates
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Demonstrations
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
J. Student performance:
1. Speeches
2. Debates
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Demonstration
F. Homework
G. Class participation
H. Written Assignments
I. Written or Oral Examinations
J. 6000 word writing requirement met by: Analysis papers, advocacy papers, refutation or rebuttal
papers, major speeches and debate cases, and critique papers.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an argumentative brief and identify its claims, grounds and warrants.
2. Read Chapter 8: The structure of reasoning and come to class with an example of an
argument that is dissected using the Toulmin Model of Reasoning. Be prepared to share
your example.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Case briefs: Research and prepare an argumentation case brief advocating or opposing a
given proposition. Briefs should be 3 – 4 pages, double-spaced and typed. You need at
least five sources to evidence your claims; please cite sources APA style in both the
in-text parenthetical citations and on a References list.
2. Fallacy hunt: Search for five examples of fallacies in arguments found in current news
media and/or politics (i.e. false dichotomy, red herring, appeal to tradition, strawman,
slippery slope, etc.) . In 200 words for each fallacy, describe the error in logic and its
effect on the strength of the claim/argument. (Word count requirement = 1000).
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch an example of public advocacy and analyze the logos, ethos, and pathos in the
arguer’s claims.
2. Find a current editorial or letter to editor in a periodical and analyze its contents for key
argumentation terms (i.e. burden of proof, presumption, status quo, advocate, etc.)
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rybacki, K. & Rybacki D. . Advocacy and Opposition. 7th Edition. Pearson Higher Education,
2012.

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 04/02/2012

