BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CMST 6 - Oral Interpretation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers the study and practice of oral skills essential for effective communication of the
intellectual and emotional meaning of a literary selection or manuscript to an audience. (C-ID COMM
170).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate knowledge of what constitutes high quality literature.
B. Distinguish between various genres of literature.
C. Analyze and critique literature for the purpose of interpretation.
D. Research and construct individual and group oral presentations for various audiences.
E. Cut and excerpt literature for performance using techniques that focus on unity of time, place,
action, mood and character.
F. Perform a variety of verbal and nonverbal skills to bring literature to life and heighten the
effectiveness of his or her message.
G. Demonstrate effective listening.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Nature, importance and ethics of oral interpretation
3. Distinctions between reading, speaking, acting, and interpretation
4. Nature of and distinction between prose, poetry, and drama
5. Methods of literary selection
6. Analysis of audience
7. Literary analysis
8. Cutting and editing literary selections for performance
9. Verbal and non-verbal elements of performance
10. Performance of prose
11. Critical listening and analysis of performance
12. Structure of dramatic action, drama interpretation
13. Performance of drama
14. Poetry interpretation
15. Performance or poetry
16. Final presentations

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Demonstration
E. Group Participation
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Written or Oral Examinations
I. Instructor critiques of and student feedback for performances.
J. 2500-word writing requirement to be met through: Essays, critiques, and exams.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “The Story of an Hour” and come to class prepared to discuss.
2. Read the textbook chapter on selection of literature and come to class prepared to discuss
three key ideas that you found meaningful.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Literary Analysis for Prose Reading: Using the “3 Touchstones of Oral Interpretation”
identified by Charlotte Lee (Universality/Individuality/Suggestion) analyze your prose
selection (with examples from the literature.) 750 word minimum, typed with
bibliography.
2. View video of your poetry performance and complete a 350 word, typed self-analysis of
your performance.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Work outside of class to prepare and practice a dramatic presentation where 2-3 students
perform dramatic literature (play, screenplay, or teleplay) with script, 4-8 minutes. A 350
word minimum typed full selection analysis is also required.
2. Readers’ Theatre: Form a group of 5-6 students and compile and perform a mixed genre
program. Each performance should be 5-10 minutes. A 500 word minimum typed full
selection analysis is also required.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lee & Gura. Oral Interpretation. 10th Edition. Houghton Mifflin, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Stacey Bartlett
Date: 04/02/2012

