BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
COS 111 - Cosmetology Refresher
Prerequisite(s): COS 106 and expired state license or failure to pass state exam
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
30 hours Lecture
210 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This refresher course is designed for students who have completed COS 100-106 or the equivalent,
and have an expired cosmetology license or failed to pass the state licensing examination. Students
will brush up on skills and techniques in all phases of hair, make-up, skin and nail care, customer
service and professionalism. In addition, students will refresh their skills in human relations, customer
satisfaction and professional attitudes that are vital to success in the beauty industry. Upon successful
completion of this course and verification of completion of Cosmetology 100-106 or the equivalent,
the student will be eligible to take the state board examination and become a California state licensed
Cosmetologist.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Safely and accurately use all equipment and products relating to the industry.
B. Demonstrate the most current methods and procedures using professional tools and equipment.
C. Apply necessary health and safety rules.
D. Demonstrate appropriate communication skills.
E. Demonstrate an orderly performance of all tasks and skills, establishing methodical habits
without sacrificing artistic skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Topics and hours are based on individual student evaluation
Lecture
Topics
1. Barbering and Cosmetology Act, rules and regulations
Cosmetology Chemistry
Health & Safety
Theory of Electricity in Cosmetology
Disinfection and Sanitation
Bacteriology, Anatomy and Physiology
Employment Training
Total Hours

Hours
30.00

30.00

Lab
Topics
1. Wet hairstyling

Hours
210.00

1.

Wet hairstyling
Thermal hairstyling
Press and Curl
Chemical Straightening
Haircutting
Hair Coloring
Bleaching
Scalp and Hair Treatments
Facials (Manual)
Facials (Electrical)
Facials (Chemical)
Eyebrow Arching and Hair Removal
Makeup
Water and Oil Manicure
Complete Pedicure
Artificial Nail Tips
Artificial Nails - Acrylic Liquid Powders & Brush Ons
Nail Wraps and Repairs
Total Hours

210.00

210.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Demonstrations
C. Multimedia Presentations
D. Guest Artists and Lecturers
E. Observation
F. Hands on Training
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Class Discussion
C. Chapter Outlines
D. Mid term exams at specified hours
E. Mock state board exam; Final written exam
F. Projects and assignments completed
G. Testing scores: a student must maintain a 75% average on all written and practical exams as
recommended by the State Board of Barbering and Cosmetology
H. Weekly theory quizzes: students must maintain an average of 75% or better as recommended by
the State Board of Barbering and Cosmetology
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a brief online article on salon decontamination and infection control. Be prepared to
discuss key points in class.
2. Read 2 – 3 professional articles that focus on the safe application of chemicals to the hair,
skin and scalp. Be prepared to give a three minute presentation to the class on this topic.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 1-2 page essay focused on the essential communication, time management, and
financial skills necessary to manage a successful salon.
2. Write a 1-2 page essay on current trends in the Cosmetology industry, including hair
design, hair treatments, skin care and salon management.

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview five local salon owners focusing on key strategies for passing the state licensing
exam. Summarize your findings.
2. Conduct a local survey of salons that focuses on what services are offered and the price
range for those services. Summarize your findings in a chart or data table.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Thompson Delmar Learning. Milady Standard Cosmetology 2012 (Milady's Standard
Cosmetology). 1 Edition. Thompson Delmar Learning, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. PERFORMANCE CRITERIA for Cosmetologists (Published by the State Board of
Cosmetology, available at Chico Beauty College)
B. Companion Workbook

Created/Revised by: Ron Morrison
Date: 12/03/2012

