BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
COS 110 - Instructor Training
Prerequisite(s): High School Diploma or G.E.D.; Must hold a valid Cosmetology
License
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
90 hours Lecture
630 hours Lab

15 Unit(s)

This course shall consist of technical instruction and practical operations in teaching the art and
science of Cosmetology. Technical instruction shall mean instruction by demonstration, lecture,
classroom participation, or examination; practical operation shall mean the actual performance by the
instructor trainee of teaching techniques and principles. Hours and required technical
skills/proficiencies are mandated by the California State Board of Barbering and Cosmetology.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate the most up-to-date teaching methods for Cosmetology.
B. Manage the learning environment and adjust instruction based on the learning needs of the
students in the course.
C. Create effective lesson plans specific to the course and content being taught.
D. Conduct classroom, technical instruction and demonstration lessons for all aspects of
Cosmetology.
E. Demonstrate thorough knowledge of the State Board of Barbering and Cosmetology Rules and
Regulations and the Barbering and Cosmetology Act.
F. Maintain classroom and learning records to analyze and respond to student learning needs.
G. Supervise and train students while they are practicing the art of Cosmetology on a live person or
mannequin.
H. Teach communication skills in a manner that encourages the growth and development of
students and assist students in becoming successful Cosmetologists.
I. Demonstrate orderly performance of all tasks and skills, and establish methodical Cosmetology
habits without sacrificing artistic skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. 5-Step Teaching Plan
2. Behavioral Objectives
3. Methods of Teaching
4. Lesson Planning
5. Testing and Assessment
6. Cosmetology Act and Rules and Regulations
Total Hours
Lab

Hours
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
90.00

Topics
1. Preparatory Training and Instruction
2. Conducting Classroom and Technical Instruction and Demonstrations
3. Supervision of Student Practice
Total Hours

Hours
210.00
210.00
210.00
630.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Class Activities
E. Field Trips
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
J. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Demonstration
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Lab Projects
H. Written Assignments
I. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read 1-2 articles focused on effective instructional strategies for the teaching of
Cosmetology. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read the sections in the current edition of the Butte College Catalog that focus on student
safety, student conduct, academic standards and grading. Be prepared to give a three
minute presentation to the class on these topics.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a syllabus and lesson/unit plans for 2-3 chapters in the Cosmetology textbook,
include lesson objectives, instructional strategies and at least one assessment for the lesson
objectives.
2. Write and prepare a lesson focused on one or two key objectives from a chapter in the
Cosmetology textbook. Teach the lesson and summarize what you learned and what you
might change should you teach it again.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Survey 2-3 Cosmetology programs in California, including both private and community
college programs. Summarize your findings in a 7-10 slide PowerPoint presentation.
2. Interview 2-3 campus faculty members. Ask for recommendations regarding effective
instructional strategies, grading procedures and methods for supporting student success.
Prepare a three minute presentation about your findings.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Barnes, L. Master Educator. 2nd Edition. Milday, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Performance Criteria for Cosmetologists (Published by the State Board of Cosmetology)
B. California State Board of Barbering & Cosmetology Rules, Regulations & Cosmetology Act

Created/Revised by: Ron Morrison
Date: 12/10/2012

