BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
COS 108 - Manicuring
Prerequisite(s): High School Diploma or G.E.D.
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
55 hours Lecture
345 hours Lab

10 Unit(s)

The manicure course is an intensive course for the student seeking an entry level position in the
industry, or for an individual re-entering the job market to develop new skills. Upon successful
completion of this course, the student will be eligible to take the state board exam and become a
California state licensed Manicurist.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Safely and accurately use all equipment and products relating to the industry.
B. Demonstrate the most current methods and procedures.
C. Apply good health and safety rules.
D. Demonstrate appropriate communication skills.
E. Demonstrate an orderly performance of all tasks and skills, establishing methodical habits
without sacrificing artistic skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
The schedule in which materials will be presented in manicuring may vary and will rotate at the
discretion of the instructor. All of the materials and unit titles will be covered during the 400
hour course of instruction. All practical operations and minimum hours of theory as listed above
must be completed by the student in order to graduate thus qualifying for the state exam and
licensing.
Lecture
Topics
1. Water and Oil Manicures
2. Pedicuring
3. Artificial Nails
4. Barbering and Cosmetology Act, Rules and Regulations
5. Cosmetology Chemistry relating to manicuring
6. Bacteriology, sanitation, sterilization, safety Precautions, anatomy and
physiology
Total Hours

Hours
15.00
5.00
20.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
55.00

Lab
Topics
1. Water and Oil Manicures
2. Pedicuring

Hours
90.00
80.00

3. Artificial Nails
4. Bacteriology, sanitation, sterilization, safety Precautions, anatomy and
physiology
Total Hours

165.00
10.00
345.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Observation
E. Hands on Training
F. Audio Visual
1. Videos
2. Slides
3. Projector
G. Guest Artist and Lecturers
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Class Discussion
C. Weekly theory quizzes: students must maintain an average of 75% or better as recommended by
the State Board of Barbering and Cosmetology.
D. Mid term exams at 150 and 300 hours
E. Final exam (practical and written) at 340 hours (mock state exam).
F. Projects and assignments completed
G. Attendance: the student may not miss more than 24 hours of class time as recommended by the
State Board of Barbering and Cosmetology.
H. Testing scores: a student must maintain a 75% or average on all written and practical exams as
recommended by the Sate Board of Barbering and Cosmetology.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Miladys . Miladys Art and Science Textbook of Nail Technology . Thompson Delmar Learning ,
2004.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Practical kit and supplies (available from Chico Beauty College)
B. Performance Criteria for Cosmetologist (Published by the State Board of Cosmetology;
available at the Beauty College)
C. Companion Workbook

Created/Revised by: Ron Morrison

Created/Revised by: Ron Morrison
Date: 03/10/2008

