BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CSCI 26 - Linux 2, System Administration
Prerequisite(s): CSCI 25
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

In this course students learn how to perform basic administration of a multiuser Linux system. Topics
include the selection of distributions, file and package management, user and group administration, the
boot process and service initialization, and intermediate shell skills. Students will install, configure,
and administer users, hardware, and software on a modern Linux distribution.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Select, install, and manage software on a modern Linux distribution.
B. Create and manage user accounts and groups including setting permissions and establishing disk
quotas.
C. Manage the boot process, runlevels, and user-level processes and administer essential system
services on a Linux system.
D. Configure a shell and create shell scripts to automate administration tasks.
E. Monitor and manage hardware devices on a Linux system.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Command-line interface (CLI) and fundamental utilities
2. Selecting a distribution
3. System installation and package management
4. Managing users and groups
5. Managing essential system services
6. Monitoring and managing hardware
7. Shell scripting
8. Booting and runlevels
9. Display and window managers, desktop environments
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
2.00
6.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
1.00
1.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Command-line interface (CLI) and fundamental utilities
2. Selecting a distribution
3. System installation and package management
4. Managing users and groups

Hours
6.00
3.00
9.00
9.00

5. Managing essential system services
6. Monitoring and managing hardware
7. Shell scripting
8. Booting and runlevels
9. Display and window managers, desktop environments
Total Hours

6.00
6.00
9.00
1.50
1.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Homework
C. Lab Projects
D. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on regular expressions in your text, and work through the practice
problems provided by the instructor. Be prepared to solve a variety of regex problems in
class using simple characters, anchors, quantifiers, ranges, and metacharacters.
2. Read the section in your text on configuring USB devices. Be prepared to discuss the
"lsusb" utility, including its options, and demonstrate its use in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a 2-3 page draft of a computer security policy for a small business of 15-20
employees with 15-20 workstations networked with a Linux server. Be sure to discuss user
and group permissions, password policy, system services, and a software maintenance
schedule and routine.
2. Use the vi editor to prepare a 1-2 page "vi tutorial" that would be suitable for introducing a
new user to the vi editor. Your tutorial should include a brief history and discussion of the
purpose of vi, and description of the 3-4 vi commands that you consider most critical.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. You have been given the task of recommending a bootable/live distribution of Linux for a
company that wants to audit their network for intrusions. Using the database of
distributions at www.linux.com, select a distribution and write a short paragraph to explain
your choice. Be prepared to present your solution in class.
2. Use a variety of online job search databases (such as UnixAdminSearch.com) to identify
career opportunities for Linux system administrators in California and the United States.
As you do your research, take notes about your experience with these job search databases
-- what are the pros/cons of each? Be prepared to discuss your findings in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Smith, Roderick W. LPIC-1: Linux Professional Institute Certification Study Guide: (Exams
101 and 102). 4th Edition. Sybex, 2015.

B. Nemeth, Evi, Snyder, Garth, et al. UNIX and Linux System Administration Handbook. 4th
Edition. Prentice Hall, 2010.

Created/Revised by: John Trolinger
Date: 03/07/2016

