BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CSCI 2 - Business and Computer Information Systems
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III and 25
wpm keyboarding
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an examination of information systems and their role in business. Focus on information
systems, database management systems, networking, e-commerce, ethics and security, computer
systems hardware and software components. Application of these concepts and methods through
hands-on projects developing computer-based solutions to business problems. (C-ID ITIS 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe existing and emerging technologies and their impact on organizations and society.
B. Demonstrate an understanding of the development and use of information systems in business.
C. Solve common business problems using appropriate Information Technology applications and
systems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Information systems concepts
2. Communication and network concepts, systems, and applications
3. Internet usage; e-business systems
4. System infrastructure concepts
5. System and Application software programs and concepts
6. Information systems security, crime, and ethics
7. Types of information systems and their roles in business
8. Systems development life cycle
9. Organization and management of structured and unstructured data using
spreadsheets and database tools
10. Practical exercises in electronic spreadsheet development
11. Practical exercises in using database software
12. Practical exercises in Internet technologies
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Communication and network concepts, systems, and applications

Hours
6.00

2. System and Application software programs and concepts
3. Information systems security, crime, and ethics
4. Systems development life cycle
5. Practical exercises in electronic spreadsheet development
6. Practical exercises in using database software
7. Practical exercises in Internet technologies
Total Hours

6.00
6.00
3.00
12.00
12.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration
B. Class participation
C. Lab Projects
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Practical Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in your book on communications and networks. Prepare a list of five
different ways that computer communications are used in business. Be prepared to share
your list in class discussion.
2. Read the chapter in your text on ethics and privacy, paying particular attention to the
description of the WikiLeaks case. Come to class prepared to discuss the four ethical
standards presented in the chapter, and your thoughts about the ethical issues raised by the
WikiLeaks case.
B. Writing Assignments
1. You have been asked to provide a recommendation to a local business of ten employees
that is planning to upgrade its computers, which are now more than five years old. Prepare
a 3-5 page report providing recommendations for computers at three different price levels:
less than $750, between $750-$1500, and more than $1500. In your report, list the
advantages and disadvantages of the computers you recommend at each price level, and
provide a final recommendation of what you consider to be the best model for the
business.
2. In a two page annotated outline, list five different Web 2.0 technologies and provide an
example of how each can be used in a business setting. For each technology in your list,
identify one website (include the URL) that uses the technology.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using the small business scenario provided by the instructor, prepare a design for a
database to manage the inventory system for the business. In your design, include a list of
tables (including the fields), forms, and reports that will be needed for a minimal
inventory management system.
2. Following your class tour of our department's computer, server, and networking

infrastructure, prepare a map (you may hand-draw or use a graphics application) of our
classroom, including all client workstations, servers, and printers and their connections to
the network.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rainer, R. Kelly, Cegielski, Casey G. Introduction to Information Systems: Supporting and
Transforming Business . 5th Edition. Wiley, 2014.
B. Vermaat, Misty E. Discovering Computers 2016. 1st Edition. Course Technology, 2015.

Created/Revised by: John Trolinger
Date: 03/07/2016

