BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CSL 20 - College & Life Success
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course focuses on developing self-knowledge, resources, and skills that result in lifelong success:
from college to the future. Students will address the challenges and transitions associated with life and
the college years. Students will also explore issues related to diversity and gender and how each
influences the individual and group physically, socially, personally and educationally. Community and
campus resources will be utilized to support students in their learning and development as a whole
person. Emphasis will be placed on the importance of understanding and balancing all aspects of self
that lead to success in college and life.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze and articulate one's unique identity as an integrated social, psychological and
physiological being.
B. Evaluate and establish healthy and achievable personal, academic and career goals
C. Examine learning strategies and critical thinking skills necessary to achieve personal, health,
academic and life success
D. Describe and evaluate the structure and purpose of higher education, the meaning of general
education, sequences of training and degrees, and the advantages of a community college
education.
E. Examine and analyze the role of gender, ethnicity and culture as it applies to the world of work
and in life.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding self within a larger structure (college, family, society)

Hours
4.00

a. History of Education in the United States, impact on social
structures and the individual within those structures
b. Education in California - history, structures, economic and social
impacts
c. Utilizing available resources (in education, in life), to understand
policies and procedures, rules and regulations, values and benefits
2. Lifelong Success
a. Time Management:
1. Personality and cultural influences that impact one's concept
and use of time. Personal use of time and its relation to one's

12.00

values.
2. Using time management for the prioritizing of tasks and use
of time.
3. Time management skills as they relate to the achievement of
academic, career and life goals.
b. Financial Management:
1. Setting priorities: creating a personal budget
2. Personal responsibility: financial principles associated with
developing, maintaining or reestablishing good credit rating
c. Interpersonal Communication Skills
1. Verbal/non verbal cues
2. Active listening
3. Conflict resolution
4. Assertiveness
3. Personal Growth & Assessment

14.00

a. Motivation, locus of control, fear of failure, fear of success, self talk,
and creating alignment
b. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs related to values and stress
c. Assess personality type
d. Investigate, compare and learn about diverse cultural, social and
religious groups represented within the local community
e. Assess oneself in terms of cultural exposure, awareness and
development
f. Exploration of one's values, work-related interests, and academic
interests
h. Establish lifelong goals:
1. Physical
2. Social, personal
3. Financial
4. Educational and career
4. Lifelong Learning

9.00

a. Assess and identify primary learning styles and study strategies
b. Brain function and memory including storage, retention and
retrieval of information
c. Short term and long term memory principles as they apply to
learning and specifically test taking preparation and strategies
d. Active versus passive learning behaviors
5. Health & Wellness

9.00

5. Health & Wellness

9.00

a. Stress Awareness/Management
1. Types of stressors
2. Physiological and psychological signs and impact of stress
3. Nutrition, sleep, stress, learning and performance
4. Healthy and creative stress reducing behaviors and activities
b. Alcohol
1. Physical and social effects
2. Evaluate one's own drinking behavior
c. Depression
1. Physiological and psychological indicators
2. Treatment options
e. Nutrition practice and at risk behaviors associated with eating
disorders

6. Multicultural/Interpersonal Understanding

3.00

a. Examining and analyzing the role of gender, ethnicity and culture as it
applies to the world of work and life.
b. Establishing understandings across campus populations.
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Research
I. Directed Writing Through Journal
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Journal
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments

E. Written Assignments
F. Essays and research papers
G. Students are expected to spend 6 hours per week outside of class, completing assignments.
H. Self-Assessment
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the provided material on current health issues, including trends related to drug and
alcohol use. Be prepared to discuss how these current issues are affecting society and
college campuses.
2. Read the provided material on psychological health and psychological development. Be
prepared to discuss how these issues affect college students, and to work in groups to
present key facts from the readings.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After reviewing Downing's Eights Strategies for Successful students in class, watch the
video of Randy Pausch's "Last Lecture." Write an essay identifying and describing ways
in which Downing's eight strategies are evident in the lecture content.
2. After viewing the film “Gran Torino,” write an essay on how and why the main characters
grow and change over the course of the story. Place particular emphasis on how the
events in the film help and/or hinder understanding the complexity of human interaction
and racial tension.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Work with a friend or family member to help you evaluate your strengths from Strength
Quest. Complete a Strength Quest handout that details how your friend or family member
sees your strengths manifested in your life.
2. In small groups, investigate campus resources by going on a student services scavenger
hunt. Work with your small group to collect information and complete a questionnaire on
student services. Be prepared to present to class on 1-2 student services offices as
assigned.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Clifton, D.O.. Strengths Quest: Discover and Develop Your STrengths in Academics, Career and
Beyond . 1 Edition. Gallup, 2006.
B. Downing, S.. On Course. 7 Edition. Wadsworth, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Articles & Handouts distributed by Instructor

Created/Revised by: Jo Anne Cripe
Date: 02/25/2013

