BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
CSL 34 - Group Experience - Strategies for Academic, Personal, Career
Success
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
8 hours Lecture

0.5 Unit(s)

This course will provide students with information and activities that lead to academic, personal, and
career success. A variety of topics will be covered including: educational planning, study skills and
strategies, time management and organization, college policies and procedures, and accessing
resources on and off campus.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. formulate an educational plan based on research related to the student's academic goals.
B. identify appropriate resources and how to access them.
C. apply appropriate time management strategies to a variety of scenarios.
D. demonstrate, in written form, an understanding of and appropriate application of college policies
and procedures.
E. utilize effective study skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Identification of the academic, personal, or career goal or issue
2. Conducting research related to that goal or issue
3. Identification of strategies necessary to manage or resolve the issue or meet
the goal
4. Application of strategies
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
8.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Research Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Written Assignments
C. Research Papers

VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the provided essay on Study Skills and be prepared to discuss in class 2-3 skills that
would particularly helpful to you.
2. Search the internet for an article on adjusting to college life. Read the article and be
prepared to discuss in class the major factors that affect first year students' academic
success.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Access one previously identified campus resource that would be helpful to you, utilize
that resource and write a two page essay about your experience - include how that
resource either did or did not meet your needs and expectations.
2. Write a two page essay about any particular academic challenges you have faced in the
past (college or high school), how those challenges affected you on a personal level, and
any methods you found helpful in dealing with those challenges.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Given the provided scenario related to a fictional student's academic history and personal
life, search the Butte College website for five or more resources that might be helpful to
the student. Write a one page review of your findings.
2. Read that portion of the Butte College Catalog that deals with course repetition. Using
your own transcript determine if our college policy on repetition would apply to any
courses you have taken. Write two paragraphs about our policy and how it may or may
not impact your future course choices.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Clifton, D.O. Strengths Quest: Discover and Develop Your Strengths in Academics, Career and.
2nd Edition. Gallup Press, 2006.
B. Downing, S. On Course. 7th Edition. Wadsworth Publishing, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Articles & Handouts distributed by Instructor

Created/Revised by: Susan Carey
Date: 04/29/2013

