BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DFT 16 - Print Reading For Industry and Manufacturing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to drawings, symbols and standards used in manufacturing and
industrial applications. Topics include line types, views, dimensions, symbols, sketching, geometric
dimensioning and tolerancing, version and revision systems and specialty drawings by manufacturing
process. Manufacturing prints, drawings and specifications from both manufacturing and industrial
applications will be used in the course.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Interpret and describe the technical information provided on industrial drawings.
B. Interpret and apply the function of the "alphabet of lines" to freehand sketching and lettering
and demonstrate proper techniques.
C. Determine part dimensions and tolerances according to American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) standards including geometric dimensioning and tolerancing.
D. Read and interpret appropriate measurement units and symbols to working drawings and
specifications.
E. Interpret and describe dimensions and features of working drawings using supplementary views
including sectional, breakout and auxiliary views.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Freehand Sketching Techniques
2. Measurement Methods and Units of Measure
3. Lines and Lettering
4. Multiview Drawings and Projections
5. Dimensions and Notes
6. Fasteners and Springs
7. Welding and Fabrication Drawings
8. Auxiliary, Breakout and Sectional View Drawings
9. Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing
10. Cams, Gears and Bearings
11. Working Drawings
12. Pictorial Drawings and Technical Illustrations
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Please read the unit on Multiview Drawings. Be prepared for lecture and review on the
chapter at next class.
2. Please read the unit on Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing. Be prepared to discuss
at next class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Please complete the review questions from the unit on Geometric Dimensioning and
Tolerancing. Submit completed review questions to the instructor when complete.
2. Complete Review Activities on Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing. Answer
templates are located in the handout. Please submit completed work to instructor when
complete.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Outside of class, please complete the Bonus Exercise for the manufactured object
including dimensions and material specification. Submit answers to instructor when
complete.
2. Outside of class and after reading Chapter on Multiview drawings please describe in your
own words the differences between first angle and third angle projection. Summarize in a
paragraph and turn in at next class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Brown, W.C. and Brown, R.K.. Print Reading for Industry. Goodheart-Willcox Company Inc.,
2011.

Created/Revised by: John Dahlgren
Date: 04/16/2012

