BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 11 - Youth Outreach Theatre
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Selected by audition
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
153 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course provides instruction and supervised participation in theatre rehearsal and performance that
will be performed to K-12 level students. (C-ID THTR 191).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate and demonstrate the special demands which a touring show places on the actors.
B. Explore how student actor, stage manager, and/or technician works with the scenic, costume and
lighting designers and respective crews.
C. Demonstrate and perform timely set-up and strike of show set.
D. Engage in all aspects of the rehearsal process, including costuming, lighting, scenery, properties
and sound.
E. Recognize and demonstrate their collaborative responsibilities with the director and designers in
rehearsal and performance in front of K-12 students and for a variety of events.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Rehearsal and performance
a. The actor's responsibilities
b. The director's responsibilities
c. Production staff responsibilities
2. Evaluation of the historical and thematic elements of the play
a. The author’s intentions
b. The political, social, philosophical and moral agenda of the play
c. Interpretation and evaluation of the historical circumstances
3. Actor’s script evaluation
a. Scoring the role
b. Exploration and creation of prior circumstances
c. Creation of the time and place obligations for the script
d. Identification and evaluation of character obligation
4. Acting skill approaches
a. Relationship work with the other actors
b. Creation of the behavioral life of the character
c. Preparations for investing in the emotional life of the role
d. Outlining the needs and pursuits of the character
5. Staging in a variety of venues

Hours
8.00

8.00

10.00

10.00

40.00

5. Staging in a variety of venues
a. Working with the director
b. Justifying physical action
c. Creation of character behavior
d. Use of props, costumes and scenery elements
6. Rehearsal
a. Use of given circumstances to justify dialog
b. Use of voice with projection and clarity of speech indoors or outdoors
c. Creative collaboration with other actors
7. Integration of production elements with performance
a. Portable Props
b. Portable Scenery
c. Portable Lighting/sound
d. Costumes
8. Performance to K-12 Students in a variety of venues
a. Justification of play’s action and dialog
b. Vocal performance
c. Dynamics of dialog and behavior
d. Warm-ups and preparations
e. Responsible collaboration and performance standards
Total Hours

40.00

50.00

10.00

17.00

153.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Collaborative Group Work
B. Class Activities
C. Discussion
D. Public performance for K-12 students
E. Improvisation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers
B. Oral Presentation
C. Journal
D. Class participation
E. Performance critique
F. Character autobiography of 1,000 words
G. Final written critique of 1,000 words
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the script selected by the instructor to create a score of the physical actions in a
variety of venues. Be prepared to share your score in class.
2. Read the adapted one hour script "The Tempest" to examine the plot and given
circumstances. Be prepared to discuss "the givens" in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 2000 word character analysis on the role you are developing.
2. Write a 2-3 page essay about how you think performance was received by K-12 students.
Be prepared to share with the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the blocking of your scenes, and memorize your character's lines. Know your

blocking and be off-book at the next rehearsal.
2. Analyze your character as part of the the plot. Be prepared to discuss your character with
the director.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Make-up/costumes
B. Adapted script (assigned by instructor)
C. Actor's journal

Created/Revised by: Barry Piccinino
Date: 12/02/2013

