BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 22 - Introduction to Stage Lighting
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course involves the study and execution of stage lighting with emphasis on equipment, control,
color and their relationship to design. Students will engage in theoretical discussions and review
artistic pursuit in lighting design, as well as participate in "hands-on" activities in a practical setting.
(C-ID THTR 173).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify, define and describe terminology commonly associated with theatrical lighting design
and execution
B. Identify the controllable qualities of theatrical lighting
C. Identify the functions of theatrical lighting
D. Recognize and explain the different types of drawings and paperwork commonly used in
theatrical lighting design
E. Calculate the capacity of electrical wire gage and safe current flow
F. Demonstrate an understanding of the function of various theatrical lighting instruments
G. Recall and practice safety information concerning electrical hazards
H. Participate in the hanging, circuiting, focusing, and operation of theatrical lighting equipment
I. Demonstrate an understanding of style, color, texture, angle and mood as they relate to theatrical
lighting design
J. Produce the paperwork necessary to implement a lighting design
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to designing with light
2. Electrical theory and practice
3. Lighting Equipment
4. Lighting design paperwork
5. Rehearsal and performance procedures
6. Color theory
7. Lighting angles
8. Advanced and in depth theories of lighting design
a. Dramas
b. Comedies
c. Musicals
d. Dance concert lighting
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
10.00

34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Assist in the supervision of stage crews
2. Supervision of instrument and cable repair
3. Supervision of hanging, focusing and circuiting of lighting equipment for
departmental productions
4. Practical applications of lighting design
5. Organizing and performing the duties of Master Electrician for departmental
production
6. Organizing and performing the duties of Assistant Lighting Designer for
Departmental Production
7. Designing the lighting for a departmental production
Total Hours

Hours
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
8.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Group Activity
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Lab Projects
C. Written Assignments
D. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the script of a play selected by the instructor to analyze the setting and scenes of the
play.
2. Read reviews and articles on lighting design in the trade journal "Live Design Magazine"
or other publications(print or internet-based), and discuss readings.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a detailed analysis of requirements for the lighting elements of a play selected by
the instructor.
2. Write a critique of a live play production detailing the artistic design concepts of the
lighting as well as the functionality of the lighting within the world of the particular
production.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend at least two live performances of plays, musicals, or dance productions and be
prepared to discuss the elements of lighting used to enhance the performance.
2. Complete a basic lighting plot of an assigned play or production for class presentation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gillette, J. Michael.. Designing with Light. 5th Edition. Mayfield Publishing, 2007.

A. Gillette, J. Michael.. Designing with Light. 5th Edition. Mayfield Publishing, 2007.
B. Mort, Skip. The Stage Lighting - The Technicians Guide: An On-The-Job Reference Tool.
Bloomsbury USA, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Selected scripts according to the production
B. Ground plans, models, light plot
C. Color elevations, color renderings
D. Scenic Design for Theatre (Gillette)

Created/Revised by: Dawn McConnell
Date: 10/15/2012

