BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 4 - Creative Drama and Theatre for Children
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: DRAM 12 and Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course will introduce students to the principles of play selection and/or creative drama as applied
to the specialized area of child development majors, elementary, middle, and high school
environments. Focus will be given to the practical use of drama as an artistic expression, as a
statement of values, and as an instructional strategy. The creative dramatics aspect of the course
covers methods of developing creativity and dramatic instincts in children. This course is
recommended for future pre-k, elementary, middle, and high school teachers, and recreation
specialists.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Employ a variety of creative drama techniques for the purpose of artistic expression.
B. Demonstrate knowledge of pantomime, improvisation, expressive movement, rhythmic
movement, dramatic literature for children, storytelling, and role playing.
C. Express aesthetic awareness of the theatre as an art form.
D. Explain the basic principles behind theatre as an instructional strategy, including assessments
for creative drama activities.
E. Explain the value and purpose of drama as an art form, expressive outlet and vital activity for
normal childhood development.
F. Create and enact informal performances collected from a variety of sources.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Function of Creative Drama
2. Imagination and Dramatic Play
3. Movement
4. Sensitivity and Characterization
5. Improvisation
6. Playmaking and Play Building
7. Role Playing and Storytelling
8. Children's Theatre and Plays for Child Audiences
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
4.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
5.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Student Projects
E. Written Assignments
F. Attendance to at least one live theatre performance
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers
B. Oral Presentations
C. Class Participation
D. Mid-term and Final Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. McCaslin. Creative Drama in the Classroom and Beyond. 8th Edition. Pearson Education, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Articles or media as assigned by the instructor

Created/Revised by: Dawn McConnell
Date: 03/30/2009

