BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 2 - Theatre Arts Appreciation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course focuses on the relationship of theatre to various cultures throughout history, and on the
contributions of significant individual artists. This course discusses elements of the production
process including playwriting, acting, directing, design, and criticism. Students will also survey
different periods, styles and genres of theatre through play reading, discussion, films and viewing and
critiquing live theatre, including required attendance of theatre productions. (Acting is not required).
(C-ID THTR 111).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze and evaluate the nature of theatre and its role in society.
B. Assess the historical, artistic, social, and philosophical in which theatre exists.
C. Critically analyze dramatic literature and performances.
D. Identify and examine theatrical components in production.
E. Propose alternative solutions to theatrical production situations.
F. Appreciate viewing theatre as an art form.
G. Analyze theatre as an art form.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Background and development of theatre:
the rise of theatre
the development of drama and theatrical performance
theatre and its relationship to society
multicultural issues
relationship to TV and film
2. The play and the playwright:
the elements and structure of a play
basic differences between the play and the novel
the substance, form
technique of the playwright
3. The acting and the actors:
theories and techniques of acting
the actor’s relationship to the technician
playwright, and play
4. The direction and the director:
theories and techniques of directing a play
coordinating roles of the physical theatre

Hours
4.00

3.00

3.00

3.00

5. The evolution of theatre architecture
6. The design and design technicians:
the role of costumes, scenery, sound
lighting design and designers in production
technical elements of the play and the role of the technicians in properties
lighting
painting
building
special effects
music or sound effects
wardrobe and make-up
7. The business of show business
8. The audience and dramatic criticism
9. The Greek theatre:
development
performance style
production elements
cultural and/or political significance
10. The Roman and Medieval theatre:
performance style
production elements
cultural and/or political significance
11. Asian theatre:
performance style
production elements
cultural and/or political significance
12. Renaissance theatre:
performance style
production elements
cultural and/or political significance
13. Neoclassic, and Restoration theatre:
performance style
production elements
cultural and/or political significance
14. Romantic theatre:
performance style
production elements
cultural and /or political significance
15. Realism and Modern theatre:
performance styles
production elements
cultural and/or political significance
Total Hours

3.00
3.00

3.00
3.00
4.00

4.00

3.00

4.00

4.00

3.00

4.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion

D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Group Activities: Research Projects and Presentations
F. Individual Activities: Projects on Artistic and/or Technical Elements of Theatre
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class Discussion and Activities
B. Individual and Group Projects to Demonstrate Understanding of Theatre
C. Student Reports. A Minimum of Two 500 word Play Production Critiques
D. Quizzes, Mid Term Exam and Final Exam
E. Final Project
F. Attendance/Participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “A Doll’s House” by Henrik Ibsen, mentally “stage” the play and share your insights
with the class.
2. Read background materials about a period of theatre history, in preparation for a
presentation to the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After attending a live performance of a play, write a critique commenting on the artistic
and technical elements of the production.
2. Write an essay (at least 750 words) discussing a particular aspect (i.e. theme, characters or
genre) of one or two plays we have looked at in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. As part of a group, research and prepare a presentation that describes and communicates
the essence of theatre in a particular historical period.
2. Prepare an individual project that demonstrates an understanding of and engagement with
some aspect of theatre (i.e. make a model of a set design you create, or write a short
original script).
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Brocket, G. & Ball, R. The Essential Theatre. 10th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Additional Plays or Scenes handed out by Instructor
B. Informational Material handed out by Instructor
C. Informational Material and Other Materials for creation of Projects

Created/Revised by: Barry Piccinino
Date: 10/15/2012

