BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 8 - Principles of Acting I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course prepares a student to apply basic acting theory to performance and develops the skills of
interpretation of drama through acting. Special attention is paid to skills for performance:
memorization, stage movement, vocal production, and interpretation of text. (C-ID THTR 151).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate basic skills of acting, including physical, vocal, imaginative, analytical, and
emotional elements.
B. Compose a character analysis.
C. Analyze dramatic textual components as they pertain to performance.
D. Critique a scene from an observer’s point of view, identifying the strengths and weaknesses of
the presentation.
E. Utilize appropriate theatrical terminology and jargon.
F. Use and apply a basic craft of acting in performance.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Application of acting methods; theoretical approaches to acting
2. Concentration and focus
3. Basic vocal and physical technique
4. Principals of stage movement and blocking
5. Opportunities to apply basic craft approaches for acting
6. Introduction to script analysis
7. Improvisation
8. Basic acting and theatre terminology and vocabulary
9. Performance and evaluation processes and techniques
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Improvisation
E. Workshop Student Projects

E. Workshop Student Projects
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Final Examination
C. Written critique of projects and scenes
D. Minimum 1500 word writing requirement
E. Final Project
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read The Actor’s Job by Cynthia Lammel. Be prepared to discuss creating,
contextualizing and charting action.
2. Read Acting Tips by Jon Jury and relate the real-life lessons in Jury’s tips to the ongoing
application of the actor’s craft.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a play critique. Discuss an actor’s physical, vocal and sub-textual performance.
2. Chart scenic structure (beats) and character action (objective, obstacle, tactic and subtext)
by writing a scenic score for a selected contemporary play.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe the physical and psychological behavior of people in various settings. Journal
your observations for reference in class discussions.
2. Memorize text and rehearse assigned scenes and monologues in preparation for in-class
performances.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Benedetti, Robert. The Actor in You. 5th Edition. Allyn & Bacon, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Scripts or articles to be assigned by instructor

Created/Revised by: Jeffrey Dickenson
Date: 10/15/2012

