BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 21 - Introduction to Theatre Design
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of scenery, lighting, sound, costumes, makeup, properties, theatrical
equipment, and construction techniques applicable to all formal theatrical applications. Information is
applicable to all formal theatrical applications. Students will work on a series of projects which will
culminate in participation as a member on one of the design teams, or as a crew member for a live
theatre production. Crew relationships and job responsibilities will be learned and the working
relationship between director, designers, artists, and crew members will be established and practiced.
(C-ID THTR 172).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and distinguish between commonly used theatrical terms applied to design and technical
elements of theatre production.
B. Define and evaluate the relationship between design concepts and how they are translated and
executed in the production process.
C. Demonstrate basic skills in creating and organizing a design project from concept to execution.
D. Demonstrate basic techniques used in theatre production.
E. Demonstrate proficiency in technical theatre operations.
F. Outline and analyze the basic steps necessary to coordinate and integrate the various aspects of
theatre production.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Organization of theater technical personnel
2. Theater Architecture
3. Scenery and properties
4. Sound and lights
5. Costumes and makeup
6. Drawing and rendering techniques
7. Stage and hand properties
8. Drafting and Design (computer aided if appliciable)
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
7.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Drafting of production plans

Hours
7.00

2. Construction of scenic elements
3. Scenic painting
4. Equipment set up and maintenance
5. Control systems for lighting and sound equipment
6. Installation of scenic elements into performance space
7. Patterns
Total Hours

11.00
8.00
8.00
7.00
7.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Experience/Internship
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Field Trips
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Demonstrations
I. Problem-Solving Sessions
J. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Lab Projects
C. Written Assignments
D. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter in the text that focuses on the physical stage and its auditorium and be
prepared to discuss the topic(s)in class.
2. Read three plays, comparing and contrasting the unique and parallel elements of each in
terms of design. Students will orally present their response to the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 750 word critique of a live theatrical play performance (of at least a college level
production) with emphasis on the staging, lighting and costumes.
2. Write a 300 word peer evaluation paper on the design concept of another student’s work.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend two live theatrical performances and be prepared to discuss the events in class.
2. Research visual elements of stage design through web searches, trade publications, live or
virtual tours and be prepared to contrast and compare the work of various designers past
and present.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gillette, J. M.. Theatrical Design and Production: An Introduction to Scenic Design,. 6th
Edition. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2008.
B. Carver, Rita Kolger. Stagecraft Fundamentals: A Guide and Reference for Theatrical
Production. 1 Edition. Focal Press, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Barry Piccinino
Date: 10/15/2012

