BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 100 - Introduction to Professional Theatre
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the major aspects of professional theatre production. Emphasis is
placed on developing an awareness of the artistry, the scope, and the impact of live theatre
presentations. Students are responsible for the entire cost of the field trip, including but not limited to
transportation, lodging, meals, and admissions to performances. The instructor will select a genre and
a specific production, and will lead the students on a guided field trip to attend the production.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Recognize and discuss the purpose and place of theatrical performance in human society and
human expression, past and present.
B. Compare differences and similarities of plays to be seen in terms of production value and
approach to the performance by the actors.
C. Evaluate orally and in writing the cohesiveness and unity of a production in terms of all the
elements: acting, directing, staging, costuming, make-up, special effects, sound, etc.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: An Approach to Theatre
2. The Performing Artist
3. The Scenic Artist
4. Critiquing the Performance
5. The Theatre Experience
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
4.50
8.50
Lab

Topics
1.
The Performing Artist
2.
The Scenic Artist
3.
Critiquing the Performance
4.
The Theatre Experience
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
5.00
12.50
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Field Trips
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Oral Presentation
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the play "War Horse" that you will be attending to understand the through-line of
actions and characters. Be prepared to share your analysis in class.
2. Read the play "War Horse" that you will be attending to analyze the plot structure and the
given circumstances. Be prepared to share your analysis in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two-three page paper to critique (format given in class) the theatrical
performances on acting, costumes, staging, lighting, etc.
2. Read a script assigned by the instructor and write a short analysis of the plot structure.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend the backstage tours on the schedule time and dates.
2. Attend the performances at the schedule time and dates.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Script(s) assigned by instructor based on play(s) to be attended.

Created/Revised by: Barry Piccinino
Date: 02/27/2012

