BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 9 - Principles of Acting II
Prerequisite(s): DRAM 8
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course follows DRAM 8 and continues the exploration of theories and techniques used in
preparation for the interpretation of drama through acting. The emphasis will be placed on deepening
the understanding of the acting process through character analysis, monologues, and scenes. (C-ID
THTR 152).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate the various techniques of acting in performance.
B. Develop an expanded range and flexibility as an actor.
C. Create a character using textual analysis.
D. Evaluate scene work developed from published plays.
E. Apply elements of effective acting techniques as a personal standard.
F. Evaluae acting technique in a live performance.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Application of theories and methods of acting
2. Craft and methods for performance
3. Textual analysis for creating a role
4. Practical approaches to creating the physical life of a character
5. Practical application of theatre terminology and vocabulary
6. Attendance of a live performance
Total Hours

Hours
15.00
13.00
10.00
6.00
3.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Multimedia Presentations
D. Group Activities: Acting exercises, developing set designs, developing scenes from studied
scripts
E. Individual Research Projects
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation

B. Mid-term and final examinations
C. Class Discussion
D. Minimum of 1500 word writing requirement
E. Major Project
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read "A Doll's House" by Henrik Ibsen and identify and formulate playable objectives.
2. Read one of Shakespeare’s major plays (Hamlet, King Lear, Macbeth, Othello, Romeo &
Juliet, The Tempest, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Twelfth Night, The Merchant of
Venice.) Be prepared to discuss creating, contextualizing and charting action.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Chart scenic structure (beats) and character action (objective, obstacle, tactic and subtext)
by writing a scenic score for a selected classical play.
2. Using a classical play as a source, discuss the physical, intellectual, sociological,
economic, educational, familial, chronological, political and sexual traits of character.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a theatrical production. Be prepared to discuss the actors' performances in creation
of the characters within the world of the play(s).
2. Practice oral articulation for vocal ability in metered prose, poetry, iambic pentameter,
and dialect and be prepared to demonstrate progress.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Benedetti, Robert. The Actor in You. 5th Edition. Allyn & Bacon, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Scripts and articles to be selected by instructor.

Created/Revised by: Jeffrey Dickenson
Date: 10/15/2012

