BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
DRAM 12 - Rehearsal & Performance
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): Enrollment in one or more additional drama courses.
Limitation on Enrollment: Selected by audition
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
153 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course provides instruction and supervised participation in theatre rehearsal and performance.
(C-ID THTR 191).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate and analyze a script for rehearsal and performance.
B. Create and dramatize the behavioral life of a character in rehearsal and performance.
C. Demonstrate a strong work ethic within a professional framework of collaboration.
D. Apply basic skills and methods to performing a role on stage.
E. Use and maintain basic production elements such as props, costumes, and furniture to create the
world of a chosen play.
F. Recognize and demonstrate their collaborative responsibilities with the director and designers in
rehearsal and in performance.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Rehearsal and performance
a. The actor's responsibilities
b. The director's responsibilities
c. Production staff responsibilities
2. Evaluation of the historical and thematic elements of the play
a. The author’s intentions
b. The political, social, philosophical and moral agenda of the play
c. Interpretation and evaluation of the historical circumstances
3. Actor’s script evaluation
a. Scoring the role
b. Exploration and creation of prior circumstances
c. Creation of the time and place obligations for the script
d. Identification and evaluation of character obligation
4. Acting skill approaches
a. Relationship work with the other actors
b. Creation of the behavioral life of the character
c. Preparations for investing in the emotional life of the role
d. Outlining the needs and pursuits of the character
5. Staging

Hours
8.00

8.00

10.00

10.00

40.00

5. Staging
a. Working with the director
b. Justifying physical action
c. Creation of character behavior
d. Use of props, costumes and scenery elements
6. Rehearsal
a. Use of given circumstances to justify dialog
b. Use of voice with projection and clarity of speech
c. Creative collaboration with other actors
7. Integration of production elements with performance
a. Props
b. Scenery
c. Lighting/sound
d. Costumes
8. Performance
a. Justification of play’s action and dialog
b. Vocal performance
c. Dynamics of dialog and behavior
d. Warm-ups and preparations
e. Responsible collaboration and performance standards
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Directed discussion
B. Films/photos/music/diagrams with discussion
C. Improvisation
D. Dramatic coaching with the ensemble cast
E. Full ensemble rehearsals
F. Public performance
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Journal
C. Class participation
D. Written Examinations
E. Short papers
F. Performance critique
G. Character autobiography of 1,000 words
H. Final written critique of 1,000 words
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the script slected by the instructor to create a score of the physical actions.
2. Read the script "The Man who Came to Dinner" to examine the plot and given
circumstances.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a character analysis on the role you are developing.
2. Evaluate the process of this production after it has closed.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the blocking of the scenes, and memorize the character's lines.

40.00

50.00

10.00

17.00

153.00

2. Analyze your character as part of the the plot.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Make-up/costumes
B. Script (assigned by instructor)
C. Actor's journal

Created/Revised by: Barry Piccinino
Date: 10/15/2012

