BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ECON 20 - Economic History of the U.S.
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course studies the origin and development of the American Economy from colonial times to the
present. It is a study of changes in and the development of land, labor, capital and entrepreneurship
over time. It includes the basis for industrial growth, land and resource use, the transportation
revolution, the development of money and banking machinery, changing trade patterns, the rise of
organized labor, and the economic growth of government.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe and evaluate the development of land, labor, capital and entrepreneurship from
colonial time to the present.
B. Analyze how each of the factors of production contributed to the growth and prosperity of the
American economy.
C. Analyze the role that slavery played in the American society from an economic perspective.
D. Explain the contributions of key innovators and their contribution to technology and growth.
E. Explain how various institutions; e.g., the Federal Reserve Bank, labor unions, the banking
sector and the federal government influenced the development of the American economy.
F. Identify and analyze the factors that contributed to the Great Depression.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The merging of economics and history; the meaning of economic history
2. The Colonial Era, 1607 - 1776
3. The Revolutionary, Early National, Agricultural and Antebellum Eras, 1776
- 1860
4. The Reunification Era, 1860 - 1920
5. Prosperity, Depression, and World Wars, 1914 - 1945
6. The Postwar Era, 1945 to present
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
11.00
12.00
9.00
7.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each

hour of lecture
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Internet applications and simulations
H. Student research presentations
I. In-class debates
J. Guest lectures and presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Portfolios
D. Oral Presentation
E. Essays and research papers
F. Debates/discussions
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read book excerpt titled, "16-page Economic History of the World," from “A Farewell to
Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World,” by Gregory Clark. Take notes while
reading and bring to class for in-class quiz.
2. Read the chapter reviewing the colonial period from 1607-1783 and take online quiz.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using copy of U.S. Constitution, identify and explain two examples in Articles I and II
that correspond to William Bernstein's "Formula for Economic Progress."
2. Write a 1000-word minimum paper in MLA format discussing a feature film of your
choosing. Your paper should consider whether events in the film demonstrate Bernstein’s
“Formula for Economic Progress” are being realized and what impact, positive or
negative, that is having upon the economy shown in the film.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read the chapter covering the post-WWII economy and take online quiz.
2. Explain the meaning of the “Great Divergence” taking time to explore its repercussions in
the modern world. Further, identify what allowed some countries to grow faster than
others.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hughes, J. and Cain, L.P. American Economic History. 8th Edition. Harper Collins College
Publishers, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Steve Price
Date: 04/01/2013

