BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ECON 25 - Introduction to Economics
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of basic economic concepts. Topics covered include supply and demand,
firms’ price and output decision making, government regulation, monetary and fiscal policy, current
economic issues and factors related to international trade and economic growth. This course is
intended for students not majoring in Business Administration.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the concept of opportunity cost using the standard economic statement, "There is no
such thing as a free lunch."
B. Draw a production possibilities curve and use it to explain the concepts of scarcity and
opportunity cost.
C. Use the concepts of supply and demand to explain pricing and output levels for a variety of
goods and services.
D. Evaluate the role of the entrepreneur in free market capitalism and explain the role of capital.
E. Explain the differences between capitalism and communism.
F. Contrast the advantages and disadvantages of the three legal forms of businesses in America.
G. Calculate the unemployment rate, inflation rate and growth rate given government economic
data.
H. Describe how the Federal Reserve, through monetary policy, affects economic growth and
inflation.
I. Describe how the Federal Government, through fiscal policy, effects economic growth and
inflation.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Limits, Alternatives, and Chocies
2. Key Principles of Economics
3. Demand, Supply, and Market Equilibrium
4. Elasticity: A Measure of Responsiveness
5. Production and Cost
6. Perfect Competition: Short Run and Long Run
7. Monopoly
8. Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and Antitrust
9. Market Failure: Imperfect Information, Pollution, and Public Goods
10. The Labor Market
11. Unemployment and Inflation

Hours
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

11. Unemployment and Inflation
12. Economic Growth
13. Aggregate Demand and Supply
14. Fiscal Policy
15. Money and the Banking System
16. Monetary Policy and Inflation
17. International Trade and Finance
18. Examinations
Total Hours

3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Written Examinations
H. Examinations
I. Class Discussion
J. Essays
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter and supplemental articles on Economics and the World Around
You. Be able to explain how specialization and opportunity costs are related; why
specialization occurs and what some of the benefits of trade are.
2. Read the textbook chapter and supplemental articles on Applications of Supply and
Demand. Be able to explain how market systems work and how equilibrium wage
differential exists when the equilibrium wage in two different labor markets is different.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the assigned reading from the text and assigned articles and compose a 2-3 page
college level essay that addresses the following issues of Macroeconomic Equilibrium:
What determines the equilibrium price level of and real GDP? Also explain how during
the Great Depression the U.S. economy experienced a falling price level.
2. Complete the assigned reading from the text and assigned articles and compose a 2-3 page
college level essay that addresses the following issues of Business Cycles and economic
growth; Also illustrate the difference between the short-run Phillips curve and the
long-run Phillips Curve.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read the assigned chapter from the text, supplemental articles and review the lecture
notes. Upon completion of the reading and review of the lecture notes access the online
learning system for Markets and the Market Process and complete the online quiz of
twenty multiple choice questions to demonstrate mastery of the content.
2. Read the assigned chapter from the text, supplemental articles and review the lecture
notes. Upon completion of the reading and review of the lecture notes access the online
learning system for Issues in International Trade and Finance and complete the online quiz
of twenty multiple choice questions to demonstrate mastery of the content.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Boyes, W. and Melvin, M. Fundamentals of Economics. 6th Edition. Houghton Mifflin
Company, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Andrew Radler
Date: 04/01/2013

