BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ECON 4 - Principles of Microeconomics
Prerequisite(s): MATH 108 or Math Level IV
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This is an introductory course focusing on choices of individual economic decision-makers. Topics
include scarcity, specialization and trade, market equilibrium, elasticity, production and cost theory,
market structures, factor markets, and market failure. (C-ID ECON 201).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Utilize the concept of scarcity to explain economic trade-offs, opportunity costs, and rational
behavior.
B. Calculate and interpret measures of elasticity.
C. Demonstrate how markets function and what happens in the presence of market failures.
D. Analyze production and costs of the firm.
E. Demonstrate how firms attempt to optimize their objectives in response to price signals under a
variety of market structures in the short and long-run.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fundamentals of Economic Thinking

Hours
9.00

a. Scarcity
b. Opportunity Costs
c. Production Possibilities
d. Marginal Analysis
e. Rational Behavior
f. Positive v. Normative Distinction
2. How Markets Operate

7.00

a. Definition of a market
b. Factors of production
c. Supply and demand
d. Price mechanism
e. Producer and consumer surplus
f. Price controls
3. Elasticity
4. Consumer demand
5. Production and cost in the firm

4.00
3.00
8.00

5. Production and cost in the firm

8.00

a. Introduction to the production function
b. Marginal and average product
c. Law of diminishing returns
d. Explicit and implicit cost
e. Accounting profit v. economic profit
f. Total cost, average cost and marginal cost in short-run
g. Short-run production decisions
h. Long run average cost curve
i. Economies and diseconomies of scale
6. Market structures

8.00

a. Perfect competition
b. Monopoly
c. Monopolistic competition
d. Oligopoly
7. Introduction to factor markets
8. Market failure and public policy
9. Specialization and gains from trade
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Papers
C. Homework
D. Written Assignments
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter and supplemental articles on Economics and Economic
Reasoning. Be able to explain how to make decisions by comparing marginal costs and
marginal benefits. Define opportunity costs and explain its relationship to economic
reasoning
2. Read the textbook chapter and supplemental articles on Economics and Economic
Reasoning. Be able to distinguish between shifts in demand from movements in demand.
Be able to explain how the law of demand and the law of supply interact to bring about
equilibrium and also state the limitations of demand and supply analysis.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the assigned reading from the text and assigned articles and compose a 5-6 page

college level essay which addresses the following: Explain the importance of substitution
in determining elasticity of supply and demand; Distinguish five elasticity terms that are
used to differentiate varying degress of responsiveness and relate price elasticity of
demand to total revenue.
2. Complete the assigned reading from the text and assigned articles and compose a 5-6 page
college level essay which addresses the following issues of Perfect Competition; Explain
why producing an output at which marginal costs equals price maximizes total profit;
Demonstrate why the marginal cost curve is the supply curve for a perfectly competitive
firm and determine the output and profit of a perfect competitor graphically and
numerically.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete the assigned reading from the text, assigned articles and lecture notes and
complete the online chapter quiz for Production and Cost Analysis.
2. Complete the assigned reading from the text, assigned articles and lecture notes and
complete the online chapter quiz for the Oligopoly Market Structure.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. David Collander. Microeconomics. 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Andrew Radler
Date: 03/04/2013

