BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ECON 2 - Principles of Macroeconomics
Prerequisite(s): MATH 108 or Math Level IV
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

An introductory course focusing on aggregate economic analysis. Topics include: market systems,
aggregate measures of economic activity, macroeconomic equilibrium, money and financial
institutions, monetary and fiscal policy, international economics, and economic growth. (C-ID ECON
202).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and interpret macroeconomic data.
B. Apply macroeconomic models to understand the economy.
C. Analyze the economic impacts of monetary and fiscal policy.
D. Demonstrate an understanding of the function of the central bank and the banking system.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fundamentals of economic thinking
2. How markets operate
3. Measuring the economy

Hours
4.00
2.00
9.00

4.
5.

a. National output and productivity
b. Price level
c. Business cycle
d. Unemployment
Modeling the business cycle
Monetary system

6.

a. Money creation and banking
b. Role and function of central banks
c. Money demand and velocity
d. Inflation
The financial system

11.00

7.

a. Saving
b. Investment
c. Role of interest rates
The role of the government in the macro economy

11.00

2.00
9.00

7.

The role of the government in the macro economy

a. Stabilization policy
b. Deficit and debt
c. Fiscal and monetary policy
8. Economic growth and development
9. Balance of payments and trade
Total Hours

11.00

1.50
1.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
D. Mid-term and final examinations
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
G. In-class assignments.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter on Measuring the Aggregate Economy. Be able to describe
GDP and identify the expenditure components of aggregate output. Learn how to
distinguish between “net” and “gross” and between “national” and “domestic.” Explain
how profit is the key to the equality between aggregate income and aggregate production.
2. Read the textbook chapter on Monetary Policy to gain an understanding of the Federal
Reserve System. Be able to explain how monetary policy works in the AS/AD model as
well as describe how the Fed changes the supply of money through open market
operations. In addition, understand the yield curve and explain how its shape reflects the
limit of the Fed’s ability to control the economy.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the assigned reading from the text and assigned articles and compose a 5-6 page
college level essay which addresses the following: Explain the difference between the
long-run framework and the short-run framework; Summarize relevant statistics about
growth, business cycles, unemployment and inflation. Relate the target rate of
unemployment to potential income.
2. Complete the assigned reading from the text and assigned articles and compose a 5-6 page
college level essay which addresses the following: Discuss the historical development of
macroeconomics and explain the shape of the aggregate demand curve and what factors
cause it to shift. Explain how dynamic feedback effects can destabilize the economy and
discuss the limitations of the macro policy model.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete the assigned reading from the text, assigned articles and lecture notes and

complete the Blackboard chapter quiz for the Production Possibility Model, Trade and
Globalization.
2. Complete the assigned reading from the text, assigned articles and lecture notes and
complete the Blackboard chapter quiz for The Multiplier Model.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Colander, D. Macroeconomics. 9th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Andrew Radler
Date: 03/04/2013

