BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EDUC 110 - Critical Skills for College Success
Prerequisite(s): Meeting with an instructor in the Center for Academic Success is
required to begin this course
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
9.5 hours Lecture

0.5 Unit(s)

This course is designed to teach specific learning skills in general areas such as reading, writing, math,
computer literacy, and study strategies. Requirements for the course include the student's participation
in three conferences with Center for Academic Success (CAS) instructors; attendance at eight separate
Critical Skills Workshops, each covering a different topic; and completion of homework for each
workshop attended. Workshop topics are chosen specific to the individual needs of the student in
support of a 100-level content class selected by the student. Pass/No Pass Only. Open Entry/Open
Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Access a variety of CAS resources to support individual academic goals.
B. Select and effectively use appropriate strategies to support success in current coursework
according to the student’s identified needs and abilities.
C. Utilize methods of self-evaluation to assess effective learning and to modify learning strategies
as needed in a continual process of self-monitoring and revision of applied strategies.
D. Successfully complete work required in the associated content-area course (the “linked class”)
and other courses.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Initial conference with CAS instructor. Student completes Student Learning
Outcomes (SLO) survey. CAS instructor discusses the following with
student:
CAS resources
Purpose and expectations of course
Syllabus and course requirements worksheet
Purpose and procedure for homework
Proof-of-attendance form
Conferences and deadlines
Academic and career goals
Current learning strategies, special needs
Individualized strategies to support academic success
Selection of initial workshops
2. Attendance at four Critical Skills Workshops. Workshop series include

Hours
0.50

4.00

2. Attendance at four Critical Skills Workshops. Workshop series include
sessions in the following categories or strands (with sample subcategories):

4.00

Reading Skills
Textbook Reading Strategies
Comprehension
Vocabulary
Writing Skills
Grammar
Organization
Format Specifics
Math Skills
Basic Skills Math Review
Factoring
Radicals in Math
Computer Skills
Microsoft Office Applications
Internet Use
Blackboard and MyBC
Study Skills
Test-Taking Strategies
Time Management
Stress Management
Miscellaneous Topics
Managing Your Finances
Tips on Transfer to a 4-Year University
On Course Student Success Strategies
3. Mid-course conference with CAS instructor. Instructor discusses the
following with student:
Progress in linked class
Feedback on workshops attended
Review of homework to date
Current and future learning strategies
Selection of remaining workshops
4. Attendance at four additional Critical Skills Workshops for a total of eight
workshops, selected from topics as above.
5. Final conference with CAS instructor. Student completes second SLO
strategies survey and SLO quiz. Instructor discusses the following with
student:
Review of all homework
Success in linked class

0.50

4.00
0.50

Final reflection on strategies learned and applied
Total Hours

9.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Demonstration
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Guided practice and feedback, self-evaluation of personal study strategies, and demonstration of
skills application to content-area coursework.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the following case study, "The Final Exam." The characters in this story are listed
on the bottom of the page. Rank them in order of their responsibility for Mason's failing
grade. Give a different score to each character. Be prepared to explain your choices.
2. Silently read the title, headings, and first and last sentences of each section in “The Fish
Story." Read the question at the end. Read the story aloud in groups. Group members
follow along, highlighting important parts, writing notes or questions in the margins.
Develop a group response to the question agreeable to every member of the group, and
present it to the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create a Life Plan with goals that are dated, achievable, personal, positive, and specific.
Include the following three categories: my dream; my long-term goals in college; and my
short-term goals in college (this semester).
2. Please identify three resources on campus that could support your success here at Butte
College. In a one-page, typed essay for each resource, answer the following questions:
Where is the resource located? How can you access the services? How and why would the
services benefit you? Bring the paper to your second conference.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Identify your linked class. Take notes from a lecture in your linked class, applying what
you learned from the Note-Taking Skills workshop. Attach a copy of your actual notes to
demonstrate your use of the applied strategies.
2. Complete the attached weekly schedule for yourself related to the specific tasks and
assignments from your linked class. Enter all other obligations for the week as well,
including planned relaxation and recreation time. Attach the schedule to this paper. Are
you satisfied with your use of time? Do you allow adequate time for the requirements of
your linked class?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:

A. McWhorter, K.T. Study and Critical Thinking Skills in College. 7th Edition. Prentice Hall,
2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. CAS-developed TIP Sheets and study guides
B. Presenter-developed materials
C. On-line materials identified by CAS faculty or presenters

Created/Revised by: Ann Shannon
Date: 03/04/2013

