BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EDUC 310 - Supervised Tutoring
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
136 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course provides students tutorial support with instructional aides and student tutors to develop
learning skills that enhance classroom achievement. Critical Skills Workshops are offered in many
instructional areas. Tutor-supported computer labs are provided for academic use. Unlimited repeats.
Ungraded. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Independently access a variety of Center for Academic Success (CAS) and other learning
resources to support individual academic goals.
B. Effectively select and use appropriate strategies to support success in current coursework
according to identified needs and abilities.
C. Monitor the effectiveness of the learning strategies used and modify those activities as needed.
D. Complete all coursework for the current semester with a satisfactory grade.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lab
Topics
1. Homework for current course work
Students will bring textbooks, notes, and needed materials to work with a
trained tutor.
2. Test preparation and review
With the guidance of a CAS tutor, students will review course material in
preparation for exams.
3. Study skills development
Students will develop effective study skills and habits through use of CAS
resources (Critical Skills Workshops, tutor-supported computer lab, tutors,
reading/writing center, individual study sessions with Learning Resource
Specialist).
4. Application of learning strategies
Students will utilize CAS resources to develop independent learning
strategies for successful course completion.
Total Hours

Hours
34.00

34.00

34.00

34.00

136.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Individual/small group tutoring by:
1. Qualified, instructor-recommended, trained student tutors
2. Degreed instructional aides
B. Critical Skills Workshops taught by faculty.
C. Tutor-supported computer labs
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Pre/Post SLO surveys
B. Instructor feedback
C. Individual student feedback
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Student brings in an assigned textbook chapter for assistance in finding the main idea and
supporting details for READ 225.
2. Student gets help from a tutor in analyzing a journal article for a sociology class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Outline a chapter of a health textbook with tutor support.
2. Revise draft of a research paper with help from a tutor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Access research from library databases in tutor-supported computer lab.
2. Attend a Critical Skills Workshop recommended by instructor.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Course materials from individual classes and individual assignments
B. Student textbooks
C. Academic reference and support materials

Created/Revised by: April Hennessy
Date: 05/02/2011

