BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 61 - Plant Protection Materials
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course will introduce the history, laws and regulations, safe and responsible use, toxicology,
risks, benefits, and sustainability in the use of horticultural and agricultural chemicals including
pesticides, fertilizers, plant growth regulators, defoliants, and antimicrobials. Throughout the course
applied examples will be used to generate discussion and aid in the students’ ability to formulate
integrated agrichemical management programs.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate pesticides and other plant protection materials based on modes of action and toxicity
levels.
B. Analyze a pesticide label for application rate information for various crops.
C. Describe the personal protective equipment (PPE), restricted entry interval (REI) and preharvest
interval (PHI) for various pesticides.
D. Compute calibration values for spray equipment.
E. Compare various online tools for pesticide research and pest identification.
F. Contrast various modes of action found in plant protection materials for invertebrates and
weeds.
G. Describe how plant hormones affect growth, senescence, and abscission.
H. Compose a written agrichemical recommendation and restricted materials permit application.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of pesticides and plant protection materials
2. Pesticide formulations, mixtures, and adjuvants
3. State and federal laws, labels, and regulations
4. California qualified applicators and pest control advisors state licensure
knowledge expectations
5. Applicator safety, personal protective equipment (PPE), restricted entry
interval (REI) and preharvest interval (PHI)
6. Equipment calibration, methods and pesticide calculations
7. Agrichemicals used to control invertebrates
8. Agrichemicals used to control, regulate, and defoliate plants
9. Agrichemicals used to control pathogenic microorganisms
10. Agrichemicals used to control and repel vertebrate pests
11. Biological and biochemical interactions with plant protection materials
12. Legality and hazards of pesticide use

Hours
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00

13. Biorationals and transgenic crop use
14. Agrichemical application methods and equipment
15. Safety in the workplace
16. Recordkeeping and written recommendations
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
E. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Homework
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read The Pesticide Book’s chapter on microbials and beneficial insects and their use.
Comment on how the use of biological control has helped bring sustainable practices to
commercial agriculture.
2. Review and critique existing integrated pest management techniques and procedures for
California cotton using your Harvest Aid Materials and Practices text.
B. Writing Assignments
1. This writing assignment is a review of 1500 words or less (this is about 4-5 pages,
double spaced, 12 point font, including figures and excluding references) on one pesticide
from the list provided by the instructor. The assignment will be marked on your ability to
research a pesticide topic of current interest and present your findings in a clear, concise
and informative fashion.
2. Explain the principles as they apply to pesticide rotation. Write a 3-4 page explanation to
show the relationship between these principles and include 5 specific examples of
pesticide groups or classes that could be rotated in a cropping system.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Locate information on a local bird pest as designated by the instructor. Give some
information of potential avicides or other control practices in commercial or organic
production. Give the target bird pest and crop infested.
2. Complete the review questions on pesticide application equipment in your textbook.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Ware, G.W. and Whitacre, D.M. The Pesticide Book. 6th Edition. MeisterPro, 2004.
B. O'Connor, P.J. The Safe and Effective Use of Pesticides. 2nd Edition. University of California,
Agriculture and Natural Resources, 1999.
C. Hutmacher, R.B., Vargas, R.N., Wright, S.D., and Roberts, B.A. Harvest Aid Materials and
Practices for California Cotton . 1st Edition. University of California, Agriculture and Natural

Resources, 2003.
D. Flint, M.L. Plant Growth Regulators - A Study Guide for Agricultural Pest Control Advisors.
2nd Edition. University of California, Agriculture and Natural Resources, 2003.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The instructor will provide supplemental up-to-date materials

Created/Revised by: Carrie Monlux
Date: 11/03/2014

