BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 48 - Spring Winery Operations
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

The course covers winery operations for the spring season, including handling and storage of new
wines; maintenance of wines from previous vintages; general cellar practices. Students will participate
in the operations of a working winery. Students must be at least 21 years of age in order to participate
in wine tasting.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Operate equipment used for wine finishing and bottling.
B. Solve winery cellar problems that result from Spring temperatures and humidity.
C. Measure chemical and sensory traits of wine to judge readiness for bottling or racking.
D. Inspect all wines in the cellar and recommend wine maintenance operations, including racking,
topping off and acid balancing.
E. Plan and carry out winery operations as required during the months of January through May.
F. Maintain up-to-date winery records that record all activities carried out. These should include
labor, equipment used, material inventory, problems encountered and solutions used.
G. Assure winery sanitation and safety during all Spring operations.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Maintenance of wines from precious vintages
2. Routine cellar operations
3. Barrel and tank operations
4. Bottling
5. Case storage
6. Equipment operation, maintenace and repair
7. Winery sanitation
8. Record keeping
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Maintenace of wines from previous vintages including barrel testing for acid
balance and stability.
2. Routine cellar operations including humidity and temperature control,
labeling and stacking of aging barrels and inventory.

Hours
9.00
6.00

3. Barrel and tank operations including third through fifth racking and topping
off, quality ranking and varietal blending.
4. Bottling of finished wines to include corking, sealing and labeling.
5. Case storage to include packing bottled wines, labeling and storing for finish
aging or marketing.
6. Equipment operation, maintenance and repair of wine pumps, delivery
hoses, bottling line, forklift, pallet jack, etc.
7. Winery sanitation and safety to include chemical testing apparatus,
testing/treating bacteria or fungal problems and proper safety procedures for
doing so.
8. Record keeping to include man hour assessments, equipment use, material
and supply use and wine inventory.
Total Hours

6.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
6.00

3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Class participation
C. Practical Evaluations
D. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Starting and Running a Winery – Read Part 1: (Why Wine), (Ready for Some Hard
Work?), (Two Cases of Wine Start Ups), (Choose Your Own Adventure) pages 1 – 42
2. Home Winemaking Step by Step – Read Chapter 6 – Fermenting Red Table Grapes Pages
67 – 78
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page (minimum), single spaced, typed paper on the differences between
fermentation of red and white wine grapes.
2. Write a two page (minimum), single spaced, typed paper on what steps you need to take
in order to be financially successful with your winery operation.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Investigate the history of various fermentation vats and vessels and how their uses
affect wine quality outcomes. Be prepared to have a class discussion.
2. Research various professional associations and organizations for wineries that would
be beneficial in assisting you with networking and marketing.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Pellechia, Thomas. The Complete Idiot's Guide to Starting and Running a Winery. the Penguin
Group, 2008.
B. Iverson, Jon. Home Winemaking Step-by-Step - A Guide to Fermenting Wine Grapes.

Stonemark Publishing Company, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Jared Wilmarth
Date: 05/02/2011

