BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 47 - Fall Winery Operations
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course covers winery operations for the fall season, including grape maturity monitoring; grape
harvesting; fermentation, handling and storage of new wines; maintenance of wines from previous
vintages; general cellar practices. Students will participate in the operations of the working winery.
Students must be at least 21 years of age in order to participate in wine tasting.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate wine grapes before harvest
B. Create a harvest plan
C. Harvest wine grapes and produce wine
D. Operate equipment used for winemaking
E. Solve winery cellar problems
F. Measure chemical and sensory traits of wines
G. Inspect all wines in the cellar and recommend wine maintenance operations
H. Plan and carry out winery operations
I. Maintain up-to-date winery records
J. Assure winery sanitation and safety
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Wine grape evaluation before harvest
2. Wine grape harvest operations
3. Production of new wines including crush
4. Maintenance of wines from previous vintages
5. Routine cellar operations
6. Barrel and tank maintenance
7. Bottling
8. Case storage
9. Equipment operation, maintenance and repair
10. Winery Sanitation and safety
11. Record Keeping
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
34.00

Lab
Topics

Hours

1.
2.
3.
4.

Wine grape evaluation before harvest
Wine grape harvest operations
Production of new wines including crush
Maintenance of wines from previous vintages, including first and second
rackings, acidity testing and barrel top off.
5. Cellar operations to include maintaining proper cooling temperatures for
fermentation management.
6. Barrel and tank maintenance to include cleaning and preparation for filling
with this year's vintage to begin aging process.
7. Bottling preparations to include inventory and ordering of materials and
familiarization with processes.
8. Case Storage of newly bottled wine for finishing and inventory for future
marketing.
9. Equipment operation, maintenance and repair for wine making equipment
such as crusher/destemmer, fermentation vats, must presses and wine
pumps. Includes safety lectures.
10. Winery sanitation and safety for all operations from preparation to recieve
wine grapes to crush/fermentation to pressing to barreling.
11. Record keeping for all operations from recieving grapes through barreling
wine. This will include materials and supplies inventories, finished wine
quantities and buyer contracts.
Total Hours

3.00
9.00
9.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00

3.00
3.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Class participation
C. Lab Projects
D. Practical Evaluations
E. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. The Wine Maker’s Answer Book – Read Chapter 3: From Vine To Vat: Wine From Fresh
Grapes pages 54-96
2. From Vines to Wines – Read Part 3: Making the Wine ( Making Consistently Fine Wine)
through (Final Measurements Before Bottling) pages 108 – 165
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page (minimum), single-spaced, typed paper on the necessity of cleanliness
of the equipment and facilities involved in the wine making process.
2. Write a two page (minimum), single-spaced, typed paper on the evolution of our
knowledge about wine making yeasts.

knowledge about wine making yeasts.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Do internet, website and text research on the relationship between wine grape varietals,
growing regions and quality wine production.
2. Make an appointment with a wine maker and go visit their facility. Be prepared to
do an oral report, on your visit, to the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cox, Jeff. From Vines to Wines - The Complete Guide to Growing Grapes and Making Your
Own Wine. 3rd Edition. Versa Press, 1999.
B. Crowe, Allison. The Wine Maker's Answer Book. Regent Publishing Services, 2007.

Created/Revised by: Jared Wilmarth
Date: 05/02/2011

