BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 72 - Landscape Business Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers the skills and knowledge necessary to be successful in a management position for a
landscape company, public/private park system, golf course and other ‘Green Industry’ operations.
Emphasis will be placed on operational procedures of the business such as determining annual
overhead, planning for recovery of that overhead, hiring and managing procedures of employees and
determining ‘true’ profit. This course is also designed to encourage development of ‘take-off’ and
bidding skills for the construction industry.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Express and diagram an annualized overhead recovery plan and profit projection system.
B. Perform all of the duties of a landscape manager including personnel, bidding, contract
management, and marketing.
C. Identify ethical and professional practices that lead to success in business.
D. Analyze construction plans and prepare bids in a competent and competitive manner.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Estimating and Bidding
2. Materials and Labor
3. Equipment and Subcontractors
4. General Conditions
5. Labor Burden and Overhead Recovery
6. Budgeting Overhead and Different Methods of Overhead Allocation
7. The Multiple Overhead Recovery System and its Effectiveness
8. Profit and the ‘Ding-Dong’ Factor
9. Deciding What to Bid and How to Do a Unit Price Bid
10. The Work Flow Chart and Minimizing Errors
11. Bidding Accuracy and ‘Getting Your Fair Share’
12. Contracts and Change Orders
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Class participation
E. Final Examination
F. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in your text on comparative analysis of overhead recovery systems and
their individual effectiveness in preparation for a group project.
2. Read the chapter in your text on bidding strategy and system overview. Be prepared for
class discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page paper on overhead burdens to business, where to categorize them and a
recovery strategy for those costs.
2. Write a complete bid proposal from a plan take-off for presentation to the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a successful manager in the "Green Industry" and share information with the
class.
2. Visit the Valley Contractor's Exchange, Chico Branch, for a tour of the facility in order to
understand the history, services rendered and advantages of membership. Be prepared for
an in-class quiz.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Charles Vander Kooi. The Complete Estimating Book . 4th Edition. VanDer Kooi & Associates,
Inc., 2012.
B. S. Angley, E. Horsey, D. Roberts. Landscape Estimating and Contract Administration. 3rd
Edition. Delmar-Thomson Learning, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Jared Wilmarth
Date: 02/23/2015

