BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 60 - Principles of Integrated Pest Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers the origin, history, and management of insect, plant pathogen, weed, and other
pests of field and horticulture crops. Pest biology and life cycles are studied to demonstrate the use of
various Integrated Pest Management (IPM) technologies for economic crop production. Pesticide
regulations, application, formulations, and materials for specific uses are covered.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the terms plant protection and IPM as they relate to agriculture.
B. Describe the role of government agencies and regulations as they relate to plant protection, IPM
and food safety.
C. Apply the principles and concepts of IPM to agricultural crop examples in California.
D. Identify insects and related pests, diagnose and analyze crop injury, and select proper
management techniques.
E. Identify plant pathogens and related pests, diagnose and analyze crop injury, and select proper
management techniques.
F. Identify weeds, diagnose and analyze crop injury, and select proper management techniques.
G. Calculate chemical application rates, determine calibration formulas, and recognize bench
space, nursery block, and field area formulas.
H. Explain basic first aid and spill management techniques in a pesticide accident situation.
I. Explain the mode of action of pesticides, pesticide absorption by the human body, and the
importance of poisoning measurements.
J. Design a year long IPM program for a specific horticulture or agriculture crop at a specific
location.
K. Evaluate application and disposal methods of various pesticide formulations and their
containers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
A. History of plant protection
B. History of integrated pest management (IPM)
2. Entomology IPM
A. IPM techniques and strategies with beneficial insects
B. Insect outbreak prevention
C. Managing primary and secondary insect outbreaks
3. Plant Pathology IPM

Hours
2.00

10.00

10.00

3. Plant Pathology IPM
A. Hosts and pathogenic organisms
B. Life cycles and infection
C. Damage and impact on production
D. Disease outbreak prevention
E. Managing disease outbreaks
4. Weeds IPM
A. Weed life cycles
B. California weed identification
C. Weed outbreak prevention
D. Managing weed infestation
5. IPM of other horticultural pests
A. Mollusks life cycles and management
B. Vertebrates life cycles and management
C. Nematodes life cycles and management
D. Prevention of other pest infestation
6. Pesticides and IPM
A. Laws and regulations
B. Types of pesticides
C. Pesticide application and safety
D. Common pesticide calculations and calibration methods
Total Hours

10.00

10.00

8.00

11.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
E. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
D. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review the California Department of Pesticide Regulation generated handout for Pest
Control Advisor Knowledge Expectations in Integrated Pest Management (IPM). Be
prepared to discuss the significance of these topics for cultural, biological, physical, and
chemical pest control in commercial agriculture.
2. Read University of California IPM Online on imported red fire ants to determine the role
these organisms play in landscape maintenance and management and how invasive pests
gain entry into California. Be prepared to present your findings in class discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Explain the ecological principles as they apply to pest management. Write a 3-4 page
explanation to show the relationship between these principles.
2. Write a 3-4 page pesticide recommendation for an instructor-assigned pest in a tree fruit or

nut crop currently grown in northern California.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Solve a pesticide calibration problem set as assigned by the instructor.
2. Create a virtual insect or weed collection that includes 50 agriculturally-invasive species.
Follow the outline of required specimens as designated by the instructor.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Pedigo, L.P. & Rice, M.E. Entomology and Pest Management. 6th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2009.
B. Flint, M.L. & Gouveia, P. IPM in Practice Principles and Methods of Integrated Pest
Management. 2nd Edition. University of California ANR Communication Services, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Carrie Monlux
Date: 11/03/2014

