BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 62 - Weed Science and Invasive Plants
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the classification, identification, and life cycles of common poisonous
and invasive weeds. Topics include the biological, chemical, cultural, and physical control of weeds.
Characteristics of weeds and their identification, and herbicide application will be examined.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the botanical characteristics of weeds and plant physiologic and growth functions.
B. Identify common weeds found throughout California.
C. Explain and demonstrate the safe methods of applying various herbicides and wearing personal
protective equipment.
D. Describe annual and perennial weed species and their habitats.
E. Contrast phytotoxic properties of applied herbicides.
F. Compare the role of biologicals to conventional products in weed management.
G. List specific cultural and mechanical practices to prevent and manage weed infestations.
H. Explain the public perceptions and be able to defend weed management practices.
I. Identify various career options available in weed science.
J. Identify and describe environmental conditions influencing local crop production.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Weed Science
2. Weed Identification, Biology, and Ecology
3. Weed Life Cycles
4. Cultural and Physical Control Methods
5. Mechanical Control Methods
6. Biological Control Methods
7. Chemical Control Methods
8. Herbicides and Modes of Action
9. Herbicide-Tolerant Crops
10. Registration, Regulation, and Safe Use of Pesticides
11. Environmenal Fate of Herbicides
12. Agronomic and Vegetable Crops and Herbicides
13. Tree, Vine, and Soft-Fruited Crops Management
14. Turfgrass Weed Management
15. Organic Weed Managment Practices

Hours
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
1.00

16. Sprayers and Calibration
Total Hours

2.00
34.00
Lab

Topics
1.
Weed identification techniques
2.
Weed identification seedlings
3.
Weed identification sedges and grasses
4.
Weed identification broadleaf species
5.
Calibration and problem solving
6.
Herbicide symptomology and injury
7.
Herbicide safety and application
8.
Herbicide fate in the environment
9.
State laws and regulations
10. Weed specimen and collection presentation
11. Cultivation equipment and use
12. Pesticide formulations and labeling
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Trips
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
E. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Lab Projects
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the Principles of Weed Control chapter on chemical control methods and compare
the herbicide symptoms to those found on assigned herbicide labels provided in lecture.
Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Review the Principles of Weed Control chapter on herbicide-tolerant crops through
biotechnology. Compare current use of commercially available genetically modified
agronomic crops with research presented in refereed journal articles (e.g., Agronomy
Journal, Crop Science, Journal of Agronomy, Journal of the American Society for
Horticultural Science).
B. Writing Assignments
1. Explain the principles of herbicide rotation and mode of action for three weeds found in
the Butte College vineyard. Write a three-page explanation to show the relationship of
these principles and include five specific examples of HRAC herbicide classes that could

be rotated in this cropping system.
2. Write a research lab report comparing the results of selected herbicides on common
California vineyard weeds. Include the experimental design, objectives of the study,
results and discussion. This report should be a minimum of five pages and include pictoral
images of the treatments as figures, tables, and a graph of the final data.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a weed collection that includes at least 50 invasive species listed on the California
Department of Pesticide Regulation Weed Control Knowledge Expectations. Students will
include both seedlings and mature specimens.
2. Solve three herbicide calibration problem sets as assigned by the instructor.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. California Weed Science Society. Principles of Weed Control. 3rd Edition. Thomson
Publications, 2002.
B. Joseph M. DiTomaso and Evelyn A. Healy. Weeds of California and Other Western States. 2nd
Edition. UC Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, 2006.
C. Ross, M.A. & Lembi, C.A. Applied Weed Science: Including the Ecology and Management of
Invasive Plants. 3rd Edition. Prentice Hall, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Dryers and ventilators
B. Fastex buckle straps
C. Botany paper and glue
D. Hand lens (10x)
E. Plant press

Created/Revised by: Carrie Monlux
Date: 10/20/2014

