BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 22 - Landscape Construction
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture
102 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course covers the fundamentals of landscape construction including: soil preparation, irrigation
system construction, paving and construction materials, hand and power tool use, landscape equipment
operation, turf and plant installation, water feature construction and maintenance, plan reading and
materials estimating. The course includes the role of building codes as they apply to landscape
construction.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use appropriate nomenclature and industry terms pertaining to materials, tools and equipment
used in landscape construction.
B. Demonstrate safety-consciousness in dress/apparel, tool use, job site demeanor, and personal
safety equipment.
C. Employ correct skill sets used in the phases of landscape construction.
D. Select and operate appropriate tools and equipment used by landscape builders.
E. Describe the importance of professionalism in the landscape industry and list industry
associations and certification programs.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Scope of the Landscape Industry in California
2. Legal Requirements of a C-27 Contractor’s License
3. Safety, Proper Use and Maintenance of Equipment and Tools
4. Plan Reading and Layout Work
5. Materials Estimating
6. Concrete and Masonry Construction
7. Carpentry Construction
8. Plumbing and Irrigation
9. Electrical – Irrigation and Nightlighting
10. Plant and Non-Plant Materials – Selection and Use
11. Water Features – Design and Construction
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Safety, Proper Use and Maintenance of Equipment and Tools

Hours
6.00

2. Plan Reading and Layout Work
3. Materials Estimating
4. Concrete and Masonry Construction
5. Carpentry Construction
6. Plumbing and Irrigation
7. Electrical – Irrigation and Nightlighting
8. Plant and Non-Plant Materials – Selection and Use
9. Water Features – Design and Construction
Total Hours

6.00
6.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
18.00
18.00
102.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Demonstration
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Lab Projects
G. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in your text on plant selection to understand the origins of landscape
plants and their proper selection for a given application. Be prepared for class discussion.
2. Read the chapter in your text on weights and measures to prepare for our exercise on
measurements and dimensions.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page paper on proper irrigation equipment selection and specification based
on a specified job site.
2. Choose three species of ornamental/edible landscape plants and in a 2 page paper describe
their proper uses including spacing, sun requirements and irrigation needs.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit an active construction jobsite, after obtaining approval from the job supervisor, and
evaluate the types of construction and equipment being used there. Be prepared to present
your findings to the class.
2. Attend a local professional association meeting, such as California Landscape Contractor's
Association monthly meeting, take notes, ask questions and report back to the class on
who they met and what they learned.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Ingels, Jack E. Landscaping Principles and Practices. 8th Edition. Del Mar, NY, 2013.
B. California Landscape Contractors Association. CLS California Landscape Standards. CLCA,
Sacramento, CA, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Work boots, safety glasses, work gloves, shade hats, sun screen, water bottle and cold weather
gear-as needed.

Created/Revised by: Jared Wilmarth
Date: 02/23/2015

