BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EH 44 - Wine Vineyard Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is designed for students to learn the responsibilities of vineyard management including
diagnosis and correction of problems, vineyard development, financial projections and budgeting,
labor contracting, labor supervision, and crop sale contracts as they relate to wine grapes.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Develop an annual plan of operations for a vineyard including financial plans, budgets and
scheduling of agricultural practices.
B. Demonstrate understanding of the process for establishing a vineyard such as locating sources
for materials and labor.
C. Define the principles used in hiring, training and supervising employees.
D. Analyze vineyard problems and develop solutions including doing research for viticulture
information.
E. Relate the operations and practices in the vineyard to the desired outcome of the winemaker.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. General Goals
1. This course will introduce the student to annual planning of operations for a vineyard
including establishing a vineyard, annual cultural practices, recognizing vineyard
problems and discussing applicable solutions and vineyard/winery relations.
B. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of Viticulture Information

Hours
6.00

A. Reason for being in viticulture
B. Statistics and economic relevance
C. The viticulture industry today - local and statewide
2. Developing a Vineyard Annual Plan

9.00

A. Dec., Jan. Feb. activities
B. Mar. Apr., May activities
C. June, July, Aug. activities
D. Set., oct., Nov. activities
E. Cultural activity timeline
F. Business activity timeline
3. Vineyard Establishment

9.00

3. Vineyard Establishment

9.00

A. Site selection and evaluation
B. Variety selection
C. identify materials needed and sources
4. Labor Management

9.00

A. Principles of hiring
B. Supervising employees
C. Training employees
D. Use of labor contractors
5. Financial Planning

3.00

A. Budgeting
B. Loan applications
C. Contracting with a winer for sales
6. Researching Viticulture Information

3.00

A. Cooperative Extension
B. Written publications
C. Inertnet
D. Evaluating information
7. Vineyard Management Problems

12.00

A. Pests, disease and insect problems
B. Soil and irrigation problems
C. Crop estimating
D. Techniques for improving crop quality
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Assigned Reading
E. Audiovisual
F. Student Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Assignments
B. Written Examinations and Quizzes
C. Written Homework Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. California Association of Wine Growers . Grower’s Guide to Environmental Regulations and
Vineyards . -, 2005.
B. Local Wineries. Sample Winery Contracts. -, 0.
C. UC Cooperative Extension . California Farm Record Book. -, 2001.
D. Winkler, Kliewer, Lider. General Viticulture. University of California Press, 1974.

Created/Revised by: Jared Wilmarth
Date: 04/30/2007

