BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EMS 172 - Community Paramedic - Mobile Integrated Health Care
Prerequisite(s): Licensed paramedic
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture
170 hours Lab

6 Unit(s)

This course provides training for the licensed paramedic to provide Mobile Integrated Healthcare as a
Community Paramedic (CP) within a local Emergency Medical Service Agency provision. Emphasis
is placed upon defining the boundaries of the CP role, identifying the social determinants of health,
identifying community health needs and available services, and performing community education and
outreach to ensure the public is aware of available health services. Students will also be trained in a
variety of clinical interventions that are relevant to the role of the CP.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate and analyze the role of the Community Paramedic in the health care system, including
public health and primary care.
B. Evaluate the Social Ecology Model as it relates to the health of an individual.
C. Identify and apply the appropriate risk mitigation strategies to reduce unnecessary ambulance
responses, and hospital admissions and readmissions.
D. Demonstrate and employ cultural competence when interacting with individual patients and
performing outreach to the community.
E. Analyze a community needs assessment and construct a web of resources to pair the appropriate
client to the appropriate resource.
F. Identify and employ methods to ensure personal health, safety and wellness.
G. Integrate the knowledge and skills of the Community Paramedic with established paramedic
practice in a mobile integrated healthcare model, as defined by the California Emergency
Medical Services Authority.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Community Paramedic
2. Understanding the Health Care System
3. Social Determinants of Health
4. Promotion and Prevention
5. Patient Support Techniques and the Impact of the Community Paramedic on
the Health Care System
6. Cultural Competence
7. Community Needs Assessment
8. Systems of Care
9. Pathways to Care
10. Negative Resources

Hours
4.00
4.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
1.50
1.50
2.25
1.50
0.75

11. Outreach Programs
12. Principles of Individual Outreach
13. Community Outreach
14. The Homeless Outreach and Medical Emergency (HOME) Team
Interventional Technique
15. System Navigation
16. Client Documentation
17. Personal Safety and Wellness
Total Hours

0.75
0.75
0.75
1.50
1.50
0.75
5.50
51.00

Lab
Topics
1. Compiling a Patient History
2. Comprehensive Physical Examination and Documentation
3. Age-Related Clinical Differences
4. Interpreting Results and Reports
5. Obtaining Specimens and Samples
6. Specialty Equipment
7. Home Health Equipment
8. Ports, Lines, Catheters, and Ostomies
9. Psychological First Aid
10. End-of-Life Issues
11. Public Health and Collaboration
12. Chronic Conditions: Heart Failure, COPD, Diabetes, Hypertension,
Asthma, Neurological Conditions, Wound Care, Infections,
Oral Health, Mental Health
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
16.00
16.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
8.00
8.00
6.00
16.00
80.00

170.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Experience/Internship
C. Group Discussions
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Final Examination
D. Performance Examinations
E. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments

1. Read the assigned chapter in your book regarding the role of the Community Paramedic in
the evolving health care system. List the most important role(s) and be prepared to discuss
them in class.
2. Read the handout on the HOME Interventional Technique. Be prepared to discuss the
application of the HOME Interventional Technique to reduce repetitive non-emergency
911 calls in a community.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Given a skills lab scenario construct a written analysis of a client's medical condition and
prepare a medical care plan for the client.
2. Create three electronic medical records on specified target groups (pediatrics, adult and
geriatric) with expanded and comprehensive objective clinical findings and plan for care
or intervention.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a low-cost/no-cost community medical resource and interview a provider. When
preparing your interview questions, consider how a Community Paramedic would
facilitate collaboration with the community medical resource. Be prepared to discuss what
you learn in class.
2. Complete a community needs assessment that addresses one or more barriers to healthcare
that the community faces. Create a model that utilizes the Community Paramedic to
reduce or eliminate that barrier.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Nies, Mary A. and McEwen, Melanie. Community/Public Health Nursing: Promoting the
Health of Populations. 5th Edition. Saunders, 2010.
B. Bickley, Lynn. Bates' Guide to Physical Examination and History-Taking . 11th Edition.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Belinda Schafer
Date: 12/02/2013

