BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
EMS 171 - Paramedic Clinical and Field Internship
Prerequisite(s): EMS 170
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
720 hours Lab

15 Unit(s)

This course provides the Paramedic student simulation skills lab, hospital clinical and field internship
experience required to meet the state of California requirements for paramedic training. The course
meets accreditation requirements of the Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the
EMS Professions (CoAEMSP). The course follows U.S. Department of Transportation Paramedic
National Standard Curriculum. Upon successful completion, in combination with successful
completion of EMS 170, the student will be eligible to take the National Registry Exam required for
licensure as a Paramedic in the state of California. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. demonstrate, in the prehospital setting, the ability to comprehend, apply, analyze, and evaluate
information relevant to their role as an entry level Paramedic.
B. demonstrate, in the prehospital setting, technical proficiency in all skills necessary to fulfill the
role of an entry level Paramedic.
C. demonstrate, in the prehospital setting, personal behavior consistent with professional and
employer expectations for the entry level Paramedic.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lab
Topics
1.
Lab: Simulation and Scenario
2.
Clinical: Emergency Department
3.
Clinical: Surgery
4.
Clinical: OB/GYN
5.
Clinical: Psychiatric
6.
Field Internship, which may include:
a. Airway Management
b. Ventilatory Support
c. Circulation and Shock
d. Patient Assessment
e. Fractures and Dislocations
f. Medication Administration
g. Obstetrical Emergencies
h. EKG Recognition and Treatment
i. Communication
Total Hours

Hours
80.00
80.00
40.00
32.00
8.00
480.00

720.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Field Experience/Internship
B. Supervised hospital clinical experience.
C. Supervised field internship experience.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Demonstration
C. Practical Evaluations
D. Students will have knowledge, skills and professional behavior evaluated daily and periodically
by clinical and field preceptors in conjunction with the principal instructor using standardized
evaluation criteria and tools provided to the student in the Clinical and Field Internship manuals.
E. Students must meet minimum criteria as described in the clinical and field internship manuals
and meet all criteria in Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4 of the California Code of Regulations.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Utilize the current "SSV Field Protocols & Procedures" text to review the policy on
transporting patients with infusions of magnesium sulfate, nitroglycerin, heparin and or
amiodarone and be prepared to discuss the parameters of this kind of patient transport
with your Preceptor.
2. Utilizing the current "SSV Field Protocols & Procedures" text, review how to treat CHF
vs COPD and be prepared to discuss diagnostic differences with your Preceptor.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a Pre-Hospital Care Report narrative for a patient for whom you provided care
and treatment.
2. Document an "Against Medical Advise" form on a patient refusing medical care and
treatment.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Perform 5 pediatric assessments in the simulation lab and complete the associated
worksheets.
2. Research and present an oral report on precautions taken by EMS prior to transporting an
Ebola patient.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Standardized evaluation forms provided by the program for evaluation by clinical preceptors.
B. The student will need to purchase: 1. Personal eye protection suitable for hospital use 2.
Stethoscope 3. Scissors suitable for field use 4. Designated uniform 5. Picture ID badge
C. Clinical and Field Internship manuals provided by the program.
D. Objectives documentation forms provided by the program.

Created/Revised by: Michael Smith
Date: 04/04/2016

