BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 53H - Honors World Literature
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2 or concurrent enrollment and Admission to the Honors
Program
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an honors level survey of important 20th- and 21st-century works of literature by a
diverse selection of authors representing different cultures. Short works of theory will provide the
foundations for a postcolonial approach to contemporary world literature, but our primary focus will
be on reading and analyzing complete novels from as many different contemporary cultures as
possible to expose some of the ways that identity, power, law, ethics, economics, and familial
structures have been constructed and reconstructed through conflicts within and between these
cultures. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. analyze and critically think about key concepts in postcolonial theory, including the concept of
the native informant, the problem of hybrid identities and the function of imperialist driven
education;
B. apply key postcolonial concepts to analysis of full-length works of fiction from multiple cultural
perspectives, and use specific examples from the novels to question and refine postcolonial
theories;
C. demonstrate critical thinking skills in seminar discussions;
D. demonstrate advanced writing skills and critical, creative thinking in composing a minimum of
5000 words in analytical papers and reading responses;
E. generate creative, original responses to course material.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Postcolonial Africa
A. Tribal histories and culture
B. Colonial histories and their influence on African cultures
C. Post-colonial identities: negritude and its opponents
D. The legacies of imperialism in contemporary Africa, the diversification of
culture and reactionary responses
2. Revolutionary China
A. The Qing dynasty and the legacy of Confucianism
B. The Nationalist Revolution and the influence of the West
C. The Communist Revolution, the People's Republic, the Great Leap
Forward, the Cultural Revolution and their legacies
D. Contemporary China and the diversification of culture and reactionary
responses
3. Imperialist Japan

Hours
8.00

8.00

6.00

3. Imperialist Japan
A. The Meiji push to modernize Japan and the meeting of ancient Japanese
traditions and philosophies with the "modern" West
B. Sino Japanese Wars, World War II and the bombing of Hiroshima
C. Post-war Japan and the horror and fascination with pre-Meiji traditions
D. Contemporary Japan and the diversification of culture and reactionary
responses
4. Postcolonial India
A. Ancient civilizations, oral traditions and myths
B. British imperialism and the meeting of diverse ancient Indian traditions
and philosophies with western ones
C. Post-colonial identities and conflicts, tensions between Hindus and
Muslims, the Partition of Pakistan, the Kashmir conflicts, the assassination
of indira Gandhi and the Sikh massacres
D. Contemporary India and the diversification of cultures and reactionary
responses
5. The Middle East
A. Ancient Ottoman and Persian histories
B. World War I battle grounds and alliances, drawing of borders, and the
legacies of those borders in the conflicts between Kurds, Christians, Sunni
and Shi'a
C. The British Mandate and the history of the Israel/Palestine conflict
D. The Contemporary Middle East, the diversification of cultures and
reactionary responses
6. South/Central America
A. The Spanish Conquest and the meeting of indigenous traditions and
philosophies with western traditions and philosophies
B. Cultural responses to Spanish Civil War and the World Wars
C. Post-colonial identities, communist revolutions and reactionary responses

6.00

7. American and European Hegemonies and Their Legacies
A. Ancient histories, myths and oral traditions
B. Self conscious definitions of the modern and how it relates to Imperialism
C. Post-colonial identities of the conquerors or would-be conquerors:
decadence, communism, fascism and capitalism
D. Contemporary U.S. and European diversity and reactionary responses
8. Definining more and less shared contemporary global problems and
potential solutions
Total Hours

8.00

6.00

6.00

6.00

3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Papers
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Journal
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Essays and research papers
I. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Please read Roy's *The God of Small Things* and consider Spivak's claims about how
postcolonial feminism is plagued by the concept of "white men saving brown women
from brown men." Which details in Roy's novel seem to support Spivak's claims, and
which details add yet more complications to the problem of postcolonial feminism? What
are these complications?
2. Please read Achebe's *Things Fall Apart* and think about Nwoye as a native informant
and the particular conditions that lead him to this path. How much are his and Okonkwo's
fates a result of British imperialism? Or does British Imperialism simply play the role of
"catalyst" as Soyinka claimed?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Choose two specific passages from the work in question, analyze the significance of these
passages and connect the analysis of the details to the larger themes of the work that
you've identified so far.
2. Analyze the character of Caliban in Cesaire's *A Tempest* as an example of a subaltern,
and argue whether (and to what extent) his attempts to regain a voice are successful and
how his example can help us better understand contemporary individual attempts to
regain a voice for subaltern groups, usually through various forms of violence, and the
effects of these attempts on their cultures and on others.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Collaborate with a small group of your classmates on a context presentation for one of the
unit titles that will synthesize research from a variety of sources including written texts,
photographs, audio recordings and/or short films synthesized into a slide presentation that
each group member will present orally to the class.
2. Please visit the Asian Art museum in San Francisco with the CCC and/or attend at least
one local function or exhibit devoted to exploring multicultural identities and issues, and
write a one to two page explanation of how the exhibit or event reflected and/or
challenged some of the postcolonial concepts we've been exploring this semester.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cesaire, Aime. A Tempest. TCG Translations, 2002.
B. Achebe, Chinua. Things Fall Apart . Anchor Books, 1994.
C. Roy, Arundhati. The God of Small Things. Random House, 2008.
D. Lu Xun. Diary of a Madman and Other Stories. University of Hawaii Press, 1990.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Films such as Farewell My Concubine, Hotel Rwanda, Khabi Kushi Kabi Gham

Created/Revised by: Cristina Dahl
Date: 04/16/2012

