BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 215 - Foundations of Writing
Prerequisite(s): Qualifying English, Reading, or ESL assessment score
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course prepares students for ENGL 217. Students will develop reading, writing and critical
thinking at an introductory level. The focus will be on producing a variety of vocational and academic
written texts, including paragraphs, short papers, business letters, summaries, and outlines. Students
will also develop an understanding of the choices writers make in different writing situations. Pass/No
Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use the writing process to generate and organize ideas, draft, revise, edit, and proofread.
B. Write unified texts developing a central point.
C. Recognize audience and purpose and make choices appropriate for different writing situations.
D. Use strategies to develop vocabulary and improve spelling.
E. Recognize and use a variety of sentence structures.
F. Paraphrase and summarize texts.
G. Use reading strategies to comprehend, discuss and respond to course reading.
H. Assess own work and give feedback on the work of others.
I. Use resources, including information technologies, to support writing.
J. Acknowledge and use ideas from course readings and other sources.
K. Use strategies to develop vocabulary and improve spelling.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Writing process
2. Understanding audience and purpose
3. Organizing and developing ideas
4. Recognizing and using a variety of sentence structures sentences
5. Using technologies to support writing
6. Reading for specific purposes (comprehension, discussion, response)
7. Paraphrasing and summarizing a variety of texts
8. Employing strategies for developing vocabulary and spelling
9. Assessing own work
10. Giving feedback on the work of others
11. Using ideas from course readings and other sources
12. Using technologies to locate information
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
4.00
10.00
10.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Group Participation
D. Class participation
E. Short papers
F. Reading and writing assignments
G. Journals, quick writes and/or other metacognitive writings
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “Black Cats and Broken Mirrors.” Take notes and compare your own superstitions
with those of people in other cultures.
2. Read and analyze the structure of the short story “Snowboarding.” Then map and
summarize the story.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After reading and discussing the structure and components of a model employment cover
letter, write and type a cover letter targeting a specific position you found in the want ads.
2. After reading and analyzing the structure of “The Buried City,” map the details and then
write a summary of the story.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Write about a time you had good luck or bad luck. Consider your notes and class
discussion as you explain whether doing something different (like crossing your fingers)
could have enhanced your luck or prevented bad luck.
2. Find a job advertisement in the want ads (in a newspaper or online). The job you choose
should be something you have done or want to do in the future. Create a map organizing
your skills for that specific job.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Langan/Goldstein. English Brushup. 5th edition Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2010.
B. Sebranke/Kemper/Meyer. Write Source 2000, A Guide to Writing, Thinking, and Learning.
Houghton-Mifflin, 2000.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. A college-level dictionary

Created/Revised by: Lisa Kekaha
Date: 04/30/2012

