BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 16 - U.S. Literature II
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 118 or ENGL 119 or English Level IV
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of influential works of U. S. Literature from the second half of the nineteenth
century to present. It will include the influence of European and other traditions and cultural
backgrounds, as well as various political, social, economic, ecological, and geographical influences
and implications that have sustained, shaped, and inspired Americans. Materials will come from a
variety of genres. (C-ID ENGL 135). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Demonstrate familiarity with important authors, works, genres, and themes of the period.
E. Analyze and interpret themes found in the literature and intellectual movements of the period.
F. Demonstrate understanding of appropriate academic discourse and the conventions of critical
literary analysis
G. Relate the literary works to their historical, philosophical, social, political, regional, and/or
aesthetic contexts.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course and Literary Study

Hours
3.00

Literary terms
Themes and context
Chronological and thematic development of literature
2. Post Civil War expansion

10.00

Major literary themes:
Age of Expansion
Gilded Age
Romanticism
Regionalism
3. Realism/Naturalism

10.00

3. Realism/Naturalism

10.00

Major literary themes:
Man and Nature
Industrial Revolution
Spiritual Unrest
Regionalism
4. Modernism

10.00

Major literary themes:
World War I and World War II
Harlem Renaissance
Literary Renaissance
Imagism/Formal Experimentation
5. Post-Modernism

10.00

Major literary themes:
Multiculturalism in the mid- to late-20th Century
Crisis of Beliefs
Counterculture
Existentialism
6. Contemporary Literature

8.00

Major literary themes:
Globalization
Questioning the Canon
Multiculturalism in the late-20th and 21st Century
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Students are expected to write a minimum of 4000 words for this course.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Journal
F. Class participation
G. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments

1. Read the selected title assigned by the instructor and be prepared to discuss in class the
way masculine language is used to describe "radical" women of the nineteenth century.
2. Analyze the reading assigned by the instructor and look for a theme related to
industrialization. Be prepared to discuss your findings in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze the way children are portrayed in three of the literary works we've covered in
class and write a four page informative essay of your analysis.
2. Create a conversation among yourself and two or three of the characters that most intrigue
you from the literary works we have read. Write a scene that incorporates the conversation
and other minor details from the narratives, but only use the details you deem necessary
for the characters.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. From the perspective of a particular literary character we have discussed in class, write a
one page journal entry for each day in one week of the life of that character.
2. Attend a local literary public reading and write a two page critique of the event that
focuses on a nineteenth century theme we have discussed in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lauter, Paul (ed). The Heath Anthology of American Literature: Contemporary Period (1945 To
The Present), Volume E. 6th Edition. Cengage, 2009.
B. Lauter, Paul (ed). The Heath Anthology of American Literature: Late Nineteenth Century
(1865-1910, Vol. C. 6th ed. Edition. Cengage, 2009.
C. Lauter, Paul (ed). The Heath Anthology of American Literature: Modern Period (1910-1945),
Vol. D. 6th ed. Edition. Cengage, 2009.
D. Baym, Nina (ed). The Norton Anthology of American Literature, Package 2: Vols C, D, E. 7th
ed Edition. Norton, 2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Literary Works: The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Mark Twain The Great Gatsby, F. Scott
Fitzgerald The Woman Warrior, Maxine Hong Kingston Dispatches, Michael Herr. And/or
other appropriate selections.
B. Other selected titles or handouts by instructor.

Created/Revised by: Tracy Johnson
Date: 12/03/2012

