BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 25 - Introduction to Shakespeare
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to Shakespeare, his works, and his world through lecture, reading,
projects, and discussion. This course analyzes representative tragedies, comedies, histories, and
sonnets. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Identify and discuss representative Shakespearean tragedies, comedies, histories, romances and
sonnets.
E. Summarize the facts about Shakespeare as a man and as a writer.
F. Describe the development of Shakespeare’s works and identify Renaissance themes in the plays
and sonnets.
G. Summarize and discuss how English history, politics, and culture interrelate to shape the
“golden age” of English drama, including contributions of contemporaries.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Cultural history of Renaissance England
2. Political history of Renaissance England
3. Shakespeare’s life
4. The theater in Elizabethan and Stuart England
5. Shakespeare’s literary contemporaries
6. Poetry and The Shakespearean sonnet
7. Comedies by Shakespeare
8. Histories by Shakespeare
9. Tragedies by Shakespeare
10. Romances by Shakespeare
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
4.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Field Trips
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
E. Analytical Research Projects (Students are expected to write a minimum of 5000 words for this
course.)
F. Methods may also include one or more of the following:
1. interactive journals
2. student oral presentations
3. multi-media presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Mid-term and final examinations
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. As you read Henry V, choose two speeches of at least 100 words in each act to paraphrase
into modern English. Make sure to use the glossary at the bottom of the pages.
2. Read Bevington's introduction to The Tempest and complete the reading response,
quoting from specific scenes throughout.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a film based on a Shakespeare play and write a minimum 1000 word essay
contrasting the two. Your thesis should reflect on the director's choices and how it
represents themes of Shakespeare.
2. Choose one sonnet and paraphrase it. You will be reading it aloud in class and addressing
three of its elements.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend one live performance of a Shakespeare play or watch one video of a Shakespeare
play, taking notes on actors' and director's interpretation of the play. You will fill out a
worksheet while watching explaining aspects of plot, character, and setting that the
production incorporates.
2. With a partner, memorize one medium-length two-person scene and work out stage
movements and accompanying expressions and emotional beats. Be prepared to present
your scene during a designated class session. You will be introducing the purpose and
context of your scene and explaining the significance of your roles beforehand.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bevington, David. The Necessary Shakespeare. 4th Edition. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The instructor may choose to utilize Signet Classic editions (or other reputable editions) of the

works to be studied, supplemented by historical and cultural, and critical readings from various
authors, such as Harold Bloom, Helen Vendler, Stephen Greenblatt, etc.

Created/Revised by: Molly Emmons
Date: 11/17/2014

