BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 217 - Basic Writing Skills
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 215 or English Level I
Recommended Prep: Reading Level II
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course prepares students for ENGL 219. Students will develop reading, writing and critical
thinking skills at a basic level. The focus will be on producing a variety of vocational and academic
written texts, including paragraphs, essays, summaries, reading responses, articles, letters, and quick
writes. Students will also develop an understanding of the choices writers make in different writing
situations. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use the writing process to generate and organize ideas, draft, revise, edit and proofread.
B. Write unified, organized texts that begin to develop support of a central point or claim.
C. Identify different audiences and purposes and make choices appropriate to different writing
situations.
D. Use strategies for developing vocabulary.
E. Recognize and use appropriate language, structure, format, grammar and punctuation for
different writing situations.
F. Read to question, analyze and respond to course reading.
G. Assess own work and give feedback on the work of others.
H. Use information technologies to support writing.
I. Evaluate and integrate sources at an introductory level.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Writing process
2. Identifying audience and purpose
3. Recognizing writer’s choices (language, structure, punctuation and word
choice)
4. Organizing and developing of ideas and support
5. Using technologies to support writing
6. Reading for specific purposes (to question, analyze and respond)
7. Employing strategies for developing vocabulary
8. Assessing own work
9. Giving feedback on the work of others
10. Introduction to evaluating sources
11. Introduction to integrating sources
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
4.00
10.00
10.00
6.00
8.00
4.00
7.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Individual consultation
F. Collaborative Group Activities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Class participation
E. Reading and writing assignments
F. Drafts and revisions of writing
G. Portfolio (optional)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read "Illusion of Privacy" and identify the author's central point or claim.
2. Read a variety of short biographies and analyze how audience and purpose affect word
choice and details included.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read a level-appropriate book from The Reading Lounge and write a book critique.
2. Interview a classmate and write a biographical article.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Check your week 8 percentage in My Grades. Write a week 8 progress reflection
analyzing and comparing your week 2, 4, 6 and 8 percentages. Then explain what, if any,
adjustments you’ll make over the next two weeks.
2. Make an appointment with a counselor to create a Student Education Plan.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Biays and Wershoven. Along These Lines—Writing Sentences and Paragraphs. 3rd Edition.
Prentice Hall, 2007.
B. Anker. Real Skills with Readings. 2nd Edition. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. College level dictionary

Created/Revised by: Teresa Ward
Date: 03/25/2013

