BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 10 - British Literature II
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 118 or ENGL 119 or English Level IV
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introductory survey of British literature's seminal works, genres, and movements,
from the late 18th century to contemporary British and post-colonial texts. It pays special attention to
major authors from the Romantic, Victorian, and modern periods, and promotes understanding of the
major works of these periods within their cultural and historical contexts. Designed for students
seeking an introduction to British literature and its key figures, this course should supplement the
literary knowledge of humanities students as well as prospective English majors. Authors include
Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Austen, Dickens, and others. (C-ID ENGL 165). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Demonstrate comprehension of the above through class discussion, written exams, and essays
using appropriate citation form.
E. Demonstrate familiarity with important authors, works, genres, and themes of the period.
F. Demonstrate understanding of appropriate academic discourse and the conventions of critical
literary analysis.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course and Literary Study

Hours
3.00

a. Literary terms
b. Themes and context
c. Chronological and thematic development of the English language and
British literature from late 18th-century to contemporary British and
post-colonial texts. (These topics will be reiterated and reinforced
throughout the course).
2. The Romantic Era

16.00

2. The Romantic Era

16.00

a. "Bliss it was in the dawn to be alive": revolutionary promise and
responses to Englightenment
b. "The vale of soul making": the Romantic project
c. "The workshop of filthy creation": anxieties of influence
Authors: Blake, Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, Coleridge, Byron, Mary
Shelley, etc.
3. The Victorian Age

16.00

a. “Wind, steam and speed”: a progressive society
b. Victorian Issues: Evolution, Industrialism, Gender and Empire
c. The novel
Authors: Carlyle, Mill, E.B. Browning, Tennyson, Robert Browning,
Emily Bronte, Ruskin, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Christina Rossetti,
Hopkins, Eliot, Dickens, etc.
4. Modernism and the 20th century

16.00

a. “Goodbye to all that”: Voices from WWI
b. “Let us go then, you and I”: the modernist revolution
c. “The thought of high windows”: post-modern responses
d. "Waiting for the barbarians": post-colonial voices
Authors: Hardy, Conrad, Housman, Yeats, Lawrence, Woolf, Joyce,
Eliot, Auden, Thomas, Larkin, Hill, Heaney, Rushdie, Kurieshi, Smith,
etc.
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Students are expected to write a minimum of 4000 words for this course.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Chapters 1-3 of the assigned Victorian novel and be prepared to discuss in small
groups how those chapters illustrate and challenge Enlightenment principles of
rationalism.

2. Read and compare the assigned poems by WWI poets and be prepared to discuss how they
approach the themes of glory, honor, and duty.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a short passage from one of the assigned Romantic poems or novels. Write a
two-page response paper analyzing how the passage contributes to one of Romanticism's
major themes.
2. In a four-page critical essay, evaluate at least two Victorian writers' responses to theories
of evolution and natural selection, industrialization, gender construction, or the progress
of empire.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View one of the film adaptations assigned for the course and join in the online discussion
forum for that film. Post a one-paragraph (minimum five sentences) response assessing
how the adaptation takes up the themes of the original.
2. William Blake famously illustrated his poems, creating meaning by synthesizing words
and images. Choose a poem or short text by a post-modern or post-colonial author and
illustrate it. Present your illustrated work to the class, justifying your choice of images.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Greenblatt, Stephen. The Norton Anthology of English Literature, Volume II. 9th Edition.
Norton, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Literary Works: Frankenstein, Hard Times, Jane Eyre, The Mill on the Floss, Tess of the
D’Urbervilles, Lord Jim, Sons and Lovers, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, Mrs.
Dalloway, To the Lighthouse, The Burger’s Daughter, Atonement, White Teeth, and/or other
appropriate selections
B. Films

Created/Revised by: Carrie Wasinger
Date: 12/03/2012

