BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 118 - Accelerated Composition Workshop, I and II
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 217 or English Level II
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course combines the content of English 219 and English 119 and prepares students for
college-level writing. Students will develop composition, critical reading, and critical thinking skills
and an understanding of the choices writers make in different writing situations. Reading and writing
processes will be integrated as students implement strategies for comprehending, analyzing,
critiquing, and responding to readings in organized and logically developed essays. Additionally,
students will conduct basic research and evaluation of sources.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze purpose and audience and use appropriate language, tone, structure, format,
punctuation and grammar for different rhetorical situations.
B. Write essays that have a clear thesis/claim, integrate support for that claim, progress logically,
and conclude effectively
C. Use the writing process to generate and organize ideas, draft, revise, edit and proofread.
D. Contribute own insights, both written and verbal, to academic dialogue.
E. Practice thoughtful critique of own work and the work of others.
F. Read texts critically and analytically, identifying key points and drawing logical conclusions
G. Find, evaluate, and appropriately document supporting evidence
H. Use information technologies to support writing.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Language Concepts
A. analyzing audience and purpose
B. fixing common sentence structure and punctuation errors
C. varying sentence structures
D. using appropriate and effective diction
2. Close, Analytical and Critical Reading
A. identifying main and supporting points
B. understanding audience and purpose
C. recognizing rhetorical strategies and evaluating assumptions
D. evaluating evidence
E. comparing and contrasting alternative interpretations
3. Essay construction and writing process

Hours
17.00

12.00

27.00

3. Essay construction and writing process
A. writing well-developed paragraphs in context
B. effectively responding to different writing assignments
C. developing effective theses
D. mining texts for supporting evidence
E. summarizing, paraphrasing and quoting
F. avoiding plagiarism
G. effectively integrating and developing points from sources
H. progressing coherently and logically between sentences and paragraphs
I. appealing to specific audiences
J. utilizing the writing process (generating ideas, drafting, revising and
editing)
4. Research Strategies
A. introduction to library resources
B. basic strategies for evaluating sources
C. basic strategies for synthesizing sources and using them to develop and
support theses
D. basic documentation practices and reasons for properly documenting
research
Total Hours

27.00

12.00

68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. A minimum of 5,000 words will be written
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Homework
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Select one article from your annotated bibliography. Reread and annotate, summarizing,
questioning, responding to and evaluating the text.
2. Read the assigned chapter, and annotate as you read, tracking the argument the author
makes about the effects of rewards and punishments on motivation.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Article Analysis: Select one article from your annotated bibliography and write an
analysis in which you summarize the article, identify specific parts you will use to support
your claim and explain how each works to support your claim.

2. Using course readings, support your position on an issue over which people disagree.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In the Learning Management System (LMS), discuss your views on the assigned reading
with your classmates. Evaluate the evidence in favor of your position on an issue in the
assigned chapter.
2. Using the SIRS database, locate articles you could use to support your views for your
critical analysis paper. Choose the three most useful articles, and create an annotated
bibliography.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Slater, Lauren. Opening Skinner's Box. W.W. Norton & Co., 2004.
B. Pink, Daniel. Drive: The Surprising Truth About what Motivates Us. Riverhead Books, 2009.
C. Ellsworth, Blanche and Higgins, John. English Simplified. 13th Edition. Pearson, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Full-length text or themed readings.
B. Supplemental materials such as websites, TED Talks, articles from online publications and
library databases, and others.

Created/Revised by: Lisa Kekaha
Date: 05/02/2016

