BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 26 - Queer Film and Literature
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines representations of “queer” sexuality and identity in films and literary texts
ranging from turn-of-the-century works that encode homosexuality in an assortment of ways to
contemporary works that explore a variety of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning,
intersex, asexual, ally and pansexual (LGBTQ+) identities. This course emphasizes the diversity of
perspectives on homosexuality and gender that may be found in twentieth-century film and literature,
and highlights how texts by self-identified LGBTQ+ authors have responded and contributed to U.S.
culture and history. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Identify and evaluate major works of literature and film by self-identified lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, intersex and ally (LGBTQ+) authors.
E. Critically evaluate both sides of the debate concerning the role of nature versus nurture in the
construction of queer identity is represented by text and film.
F. Analyze and discuss the ways different texts reflect the historical construction of gender- and
sexuality-based identities in a variety of cultures and time periods.
G. Assess the role of literature and film by self-identified queer authors in the larger movement for
queer visibility.
H. Analyze the historical development of LGBTQ+ literature and relate the contribution of
LGBTQ+ texts to U.S. history and culture.
I. Analyze and evaluate the ways contemporary beliefs about queer identity are complicated by
writings of authors who have been read as representing homosexual desire in their works, yet
who would not have identified themselves as such.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Heteronormativity and Patriarchy
2. Homophobia and Religion in the U.S.
3. Sexuality, Heteronormativity and Patriarchy in the U.S.
4. The Harlem Renaissance and Converging and Diverging of Race- and
Sex-based Discrimination in the U.S.

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00

5. After Stonewall: 70s Backlash in the U.S.
6. The 80s AIDS Crisis and Its Legacy
7. Trans Identities and Histories of Violence
8. Contemporary Coming Out Stories
9. LGBTQ+ Marriage and Family in the U.S.
Total Hours

6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Group Participation
B. Written Assignments
C. Essays and research papers
D. Class Discussion
E. Student project - oral presentation and/or written overview
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the work assigned by your instructor, choose two quotations from the work, analyze
the meaning of the quote and explain how you think it connects to the main themes or
points in the work as a whole.
2. Evaluate one of your classmates' analyses, and offer suggestions for deepening the
analysis. Think about the ways your own reading differed from your classmate's and offer
these different perspectives and use additional quotes from the reading to question, debate,
or add to your classmate's analysis.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Form a specific question that has emerged from your choice of one or a comparison of two
reading assignments, and use that question to help you formulate a thesis. Then support
and develop that thesis in a three to four page formal essay, consistently synthesizing
specific details from your chosen readings and outside research and come to a logical
conclusion that develops the implications of your thesis for your audience.
2. Choose one of the following topics: the biological versus the socially constructed, the
primacy of religious or social codes for heteronormativity, the potential benefits and
detriments of categorizing, the potential benefits and detriments of queering identities, or
the potential benefits and detriments of resisting heteronormative views of marriage and
family. Write a five to seven page essay, using examples from specific readings and films
we've discussed, that supports and develops your own, specific thesis within one of these
topics.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend one of the recommended theater performances, art shows, local LGBTQ+ events,
or film screenings announced by the instructor. In a two to three page report, explain and
assess the statements you think the event makes about queer identities, heteronormativity,

and categorization.
2. Choose one of the following topics: the biological versus the socially constructed, the
primacy of religious or social codes for heteronormativity, the potential benefits and
detriments of categorizing, the potential benefits and detriments of queering identities, or
the potential benefits and detriments of resisting heteronormative views of marriage and
family. Research and locate at least five outside sources, and create an annotated
bibliography. In your bibliography, you should list these sources alphabetically,
summarize their major arguments and explanations, and explain how they help you
answer your specific question in your research topic. Include key quotations for each
source that directly illustrate and support your summary of that source's major arguments.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lorde, Audre. The Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power. Kore Press, 2001.
B. Catriona Rueda Esquibel. With Her Machete in Her Hand: Reading Chicana Lesbians.
University of Texas Press, 2006.
C. Essex Hemphill, ed. Brother to Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men. RedBone Press,
2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Specific texts and individual authors and directors to be determined by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: Cristina Dahl
Date: 04/15/2013

