BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 20 - Introduction to Poetry
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

In this course students will study the contemporary poetry of various cultures, styles and literary
movements. Emphasis is placed upon deepening the student’s understanding of poetry in a historical
and social context. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts. and interpreting literature. These frameworks may include political,
socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural, ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender,
and genre development.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Recognize and describe different poetic forms, structures, elements of the craft and appropriate
literary terminology.
E. Recognize and discuss a wide range of poetry from contemporary to canonical work that is
diverse in voice, style, subject matter, and ethnic and cultural origin.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Elements of the craft of poetry: Diction (denotation versus connotation),
tone, image, metaphor, simile, form, meter, rhyme and rhythm, voice.
2. Social, historical and cultural considerations of individual poems and poetic
movements.
3. Literary criticism/ critical approaches to literature. Schools discussed could
include but would not be limited to formalism, psychoanalytic criticism,
mythological criticism, feminist criticism, post-modern criticism/ethnic
studies approaches, and biographical criticism.
4. The above three units will be introduced during the first three weeks and then
utilized throughout the semester while students examine and analyze poetry
by multicultural contemporary and canonical writers. Such major figures
may include Dickinson, Whitman, Blake, Shakespeare, Joyce, Keats, Eavan
Boland, Akhmatova, Tsvetayeva, Neruda, Paz, Eliot, Williams, Bishop,
Plath, Sexton, Milosz, Dove, Brooks, Lucille Clifton, Rilke, Yeats, Verlaine,
Breton, Eluard, Machado, Alexie, Celan, Soto, Lorde, Rich, Ashbery,

Hours
16.00
10.00
10.00

15.00

Ginsberg, Kenyon, AI, Brenda Hillman, Jane Hirshfield, Sharon Olds,
Robert Hass, Donald Hall, Kay Ryan, Lyn Hejinian, and Joy Harjo.
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Class discussion
G. Small group discussion of poems
H. Films,videos of poetry readings, and poetry online, i.e., Poets.org, Poetry Daily, and literary
magazines online.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers
B. Oral Presentation
C. Journal
D. Short papers
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
G. In class writing
H. Critical papers totaling at least 2,500 words; at least one of these papers should involve outside
research in literary criticism and/or biography
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read assigned book of poems and be prepared to discuss the form the poems take and how
they relate to the content of the poems. Also be prepared to discuss what lense you
analyze the poems through, i.e. psycholanalytic, gender specific, socioeconomic,
formalism or new criticism.
2. Read assigned course text and analyze the poems in terms of the elements of craft.
Prepare for discussion in class based on your analysis of poems.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Explicate a poem from the assigned text that interests you. Analyze the diction and
imagery in the poem, and discuss the poet's choices and whether or not you find them
effective. Two pages, or 500 words.
2. Write an essay examining and analyzing several poems through the lense of a particular
literary theory. Consider the historical, social and cultural contexts of the poems. 10001250 words.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read a book of contemporary poetry from the library, and write an essay in which you
review the book, analyzing the poems from a traditionalist, formalist or new criticism
perspective. 500-750 words.
2. Attend a poetry reading locally or watch a poetry reading on-line. Write a review of the
experience.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Milosz, Czeslaw. A Book of Luminous Things. Harvest Book, 1998.

B. ed. Ilya Kaminsky and Susan Harris. The Ecco Anthology of International Poetry. Ecco press,
2010.
C. Hirsch, Edward. How to Read a Poem and Fall in Love with Poetry. Harvest Book, 2007.
D. Hoover, Paul. Postmodern American Poetry: A Norton Anthology. 2nd Edition. W.W. Norton,
2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Specific texts and individual authors to be determined by instructor

Created/Revised by: Amy Antongiovanni
Date: 04/29/2013

