BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 14 - U.S. Literature I
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 118 or ENGL 119 or English Level IV
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of influential works of U. S. Literature from the colonial beginnings through the
second half of the nineteenth century. It will include the influence of European and other traditions
and cultural backgrounds, as well as various political, social, economic, ecological, and geographical
influences and implications that have sustained, shaped, and inspired Americans. Materials will come
from a variety of genres. (C-ID ENGL 130). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within the course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated
in other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Demonstrate familiarity with important authors, works, genres, and themes of the period.
E. Analyze and interpret themes found in the literature and intellectual movements of the period.
F. Demonstrate understanding of appropriate academic discourse and the conventions of critical
literary analysis.
G. Relate the literary works to their historical, philosophical, social, political, regional, and/or
aesthetic contexts.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course and Literary Study

Hours
3.00

Literary terms
Themes and context
Chronological and thematic development of literature
2. Settlement and colonization
Major literary themes:
Geography and the New World
Interactions with Native Americans
The questions of religion
Experiments in political freedom

12.00

3. The Enlightenment in America

12.00

Major literary themes:
The impact of science and reason
The revolutionary spirit
The new political reality
The new social spirit
4. The American Renaissance

12.00

Major literary themes:
The questions of American identity
American Romanticism
Westward expansion and manifest destiny
Social boundaries: culture, ethnicity, and gender
5. The Civil War and abolition

12.00

Major literary themes:
Geographic and social divisions
The "peculiar institution": slavery
The Civil War
Post-war realities: realism, naturalism, and social tension
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Students are expected to write a minimum of 4000 words for this course.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Journal
F. Class participation
G. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS

A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Frederick Douglas and prepare two to three questions for small group discussion.
2. Analyze a poem by Emily Dickinson for evidence of a theme that has been previously
discussed. Bring your notes to class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a two-page response paper, compare how two texts examine the construction of racial
identity.
2. Write a three-page dialogue for characters from disparate texts about one of the course's
major themes.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a local reading or presentation of a literary work related to the course and write a
short critique.
2. Research an important historical event that influenced one or more course texts and
present that information in a blog entry on the course's online site.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lauter, Paul (ed). The Heath Anthology of American Literature Vol. A. 7th Edition. Houghton
Mifflin, 2013.
B. Baym, Nina (ed). The Norton Anthology of American Literature Vols. A and B. 8th Edition.
W.W. Norton, 2012.
C. Lauter, Paul (ed). The Heath Anthology of American Literature Vol. B. 7th Edition. Houghton
Mifflin, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Literary works as assigned by instructor.
B. Films

Created/Revised by: Carrie Wasinger
Date: 12/03/2012

