BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 2 - Reading and Composition
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 118 or ENGL 119 or English Level IV
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course develops college-level critical reading and writing practices. Students will critically read
expository, argumentative, and fictional texts and develop expository, persuasive, and argumentative
academic writing. Essays will demonstrate reading comprehension, analysis, critique, academic
research, and synthesis. (C-ID ENGL 100). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Employ writing and reading for inquiry, learning, thinking, and communicating
B. Read, analyze, and evaluate a variety of non-fiction and literary texts for content, context, and
rhetorical merit with consideration of tone, audience, and purpose
C. Approach a writing assignment as a series of tasks, including finding, evaluating, analyzing, and
synthesizing appropriate primary and secondary sources
D. Integrate their own ideas with those of others through paraphrasing, summarizing, and quoting
without plagiarism
E. Write a unified, well-developed essay with an arguable thesis, persuasive academic support, and
clear awareness of audience. A minimum of 6000 words of formal writing will be required
F. Apply conventions of format and structure appropriate to the rhetorical situation
G. Adopt appropriate voice, tone, diction, and level of formality
H. Apply the use of appropriate syntax, grammar, punctuation, and spelling
I. Effectively use pre-writing, revising, editing, and proofreading practices
J. Locate, evaluate, and integrate scholarly sources using appropriate documentation format
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Critical and analytical reading of college-level texts
A. Reading scholarly sources
B. Annotating texts
C. Identifying key points, drawing inferences, and understanding broader
implications
D. Critically evaluating arguments
2. Audience and purpose
A. identifying target audiences
B. anticipating reader response and addressing opposing or differing
perspectives
C. Identifying and following conventions that meet the needs of particular
audiences
3. The writing process

Hours
14.00

3.00

12.00

3. The writing process
A. Methods for pre-writing and drafting
B. Strategies for global revision
C. Proofreading and editing strategies, including using research and grammar
handbooks and/or other sources to edit papers
D. Recognizing and using appropriate grammar, punctuation, and spelling,
as well as effective syntax
4. Research strategies and documentation methods
A. Strategies for focusing searches and finding strong sources
B. Methods for organizing research
C. Understanding discipline-specific conventions for documenting research
D. Using research handbooks to identify the necessary format for
documenting individual sources
5. Evaluating and integrating sources into a research essay
A. Identifying scholarly versus non-scholarly sources
B. Methods for evaluating popular media, online, and print sources
C. Strategies for synthesizing points from source materials into more
complex, college-level arguments
Total Hours

12.00

10.00

12.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Individual conferences
F. Online resources and technology enhanced instruction
G. A minimum of 6,000 words will be written
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the essay assigned by the instructor. As you read, note the author's claim and
supporting evidence as well as his or her focus on audience, tone, and rhetorical strategies.
2. Carefully read the essay assigned by the instructor. Note the author's use of inductive
and/or deductive logic, attention to counterarguments, and use of fallacious reasoning to
persuade the reader.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Construct a well-developed essay in which you critique an author's support for a claim,
focusing on the quantity and quality of evidence as well as on the use of logic and
fallacies. Minimum of 3 to 5 pages.
2. Construct a well-developed essay in which you propose a concrete solution to a common
societal problem and support that solution with evidence gleaned from a variety of

sources. To gather ideas for your essay, conduct research on our college's databases. Cite
your sources using MLA or APA style. Minimum of 3 to 5 pages.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Find a scholarly and a popular source that both address the same aspect of the issue you
are writing about for your inquiry project. Note similarities and differences in how the two
sources treat the topic, including any information or perspectives that are glossed over or
ommitted in either source.
2. Use our college's online databases to research what other scholars have to say about an
issue detailed in an assigned academic article. Bring two articles to the next class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Jacobus, Lee (Ed.). A World of Ideas: Essential Readings for College Writers. 8th Edition.
Bedford/St. Martin's, 2009.
B. Shrodes, Caroline F. et. al.. The Conscious Reader. 12th Edition. Longman, 2011.
C. Howard, Rebecca Moore. Writing Matters: A Handbook for Writing and Research. 1st Edition.
McGraw Hill, 2010.
D. Hacker, Diana. A Writer's Reference with 2009 MLA and 2010 APA Updates. 6th Edition.
Bedford/St. Martin's, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The Purdue Online Writing Lab (OWL)
B. Film, video and other electronic sources

Created/Revised by: Kenneth Bearden
Date: 04/15/2013

