BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 4 - Introduction to Literature
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course concentrates on introducing students to a wealth of representative literary works from the
major genres. Additionally, the course develops the basic skills necessary in literary analysis, namely
critical reading, analytical writing, and research methods. Emphasis is placed on investigating and
appreciating the cultural, historical, and aesthetic aspects of literary works chosen from at least four of
the five literary genres. (C-ID ENGL 120). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Interpret and discuss how various literary works both reflect and influence various aspects of
culture.
E. Identify key elements of major genres and define and apply relevant literary terms in the
analysis of specific works.
F. Utilize standard methods of essay development in the written analysis of literary works.
G. Employ appropriate research and documentation methodologies.
H. Utilize proper English syntax and mechanics in her/his own writing.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Brief review of subjects discussed in English 2

Hours
1.00

A. Reading and writing critically
B. The art of writing
2. The research paper, use of the library, and investigative techniques.

2.00

A. How to generate our own ideas.
B. How to use the ideas of other scholars.
C. Using MLA style.
D. How to search library catalogues and databases and identify useful
sources
3. Reflecting human diversity: The literary achievements of minorities and

2.00

3. Reflecting human diversity: The literary achievements of minorities and
women all over the world.

2.00

A. The literary canon: Diversity and Controversy
B. The Western Canon and the shift to literature as world literature,
emphasizing cultural diversity within each culture, the work of women
authors and of ethnic, religious, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
queer (LGBTQ+) minorities in those cultures
4. Literary Terms

2.00

A. Tone and mood
B. Literal and non-critical statement
C. Explicit and implicit statement
D. Purpose, attitude, meaning
E. Connotation, irony, satire, sarcasm, humor
F. Diction, figurative language and symbol and their influences on theme
and audience
5. Critical approaches to literature

2.00

A. Political and socio-economic approaches
B. Feminist and Queer
C. Geographical
D. Ethnic and Cultural
E. Historical
F. Ecological
G. Psychoanalytical
H. Postcolonial
I. Biographical
J. Mythological
K. Structuralist and Poststructuralist
The above topics will be discussed within the first weeks of the course and
integrated throughout the semester as appropriate.
6. Short Story

9.00

A. History of the short story
B. Elements of the short story
C. Themes and context
Major Writers and Works: Alice Walker’s "Roselily,” William Faulkner’s
“A Rose for Emily,” Herman Melville’s “Bartleby the Scrivener,” Sherman
Alexie’s “Class,” Jamaica Kincaid’s “Girl,” Hayashi Mariko’s “Wine,”
Naguib Mahfouz’s “The Answer is No,” Chimamanda Adichie's "The
Arrangers of Marriage," Lu Xun's "Diary of a Madman" and others.
7. Drama

9.00

A. History of drama
B. Elements and context
C. Themes and context
Major Writers and Works: Sophocles’ Antigone, Susan Graspell’s Trifles,
William Shakespeare’s The Tempest, Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll House, D. H.
Hwang’s M. Butterfly, August Wilson’s Fences, and others.
8. The Novel

9.00

8. The Novel

9.00

A. History of the novel
B. The elements of the novel
C. Themes and context
Major Writers and Works: Henry James’s Daisy Miller, Toni Morrison’s
Beloved, Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall Apart, Stephen Galloway's The
Cellist of Sarajevo,and others.
9. Poetry

9.00

A. History of poetry
B. The elements of poetry
C. Themes and context
Major Writers and Works: Gwendolyn Brooks’ “We Real Cool,” Elizabeth
Bishop’s “The Fish,” Matsuo Basho’s “Under Cherry Trees,” Willam
Shakespeare’s Sonnet 116, Gary Soto’s “Mexicans Begin Jogging,” Emily
Dickinson’s “Success is Counted Sweetest,” Brian Turner's "2000 lbs.,"
Muriel Rukeyser's "Waiting for Icarus," and others.
10. Film

6.00

A. History of film
B. The elements of film
C. Terms and technology
D. Themes and context
Major Filmmakers and Works: Akira Kurosawa’s “Samurai Series,” Franco
Zeffirelli’s “Romeo and Juliet,” Alan Ball's "American Beauty," Roman
Polanski's "The Pianist," Deepa Mehta's "Water," and
others.
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Small group work
E. Interactive Journals
F. Oral Presentations
G. Blackboard/Interactive/Online Enhancement
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Examinations
F. Three to five critical essays to include the research paper - 6,000 -8,000 total words required.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments

1. Read James Wright's "Saint Judas" and evaluate his use of allusion and the sonnet form.
2. Read Toni Morrison's Beloved, and find as many possible symbols as you can. Choose the
three uses of symbol that you found most compelling, and try to interpret them in multiple
ways, relating each interpretation back to what you've identified as a major theme in the
novel. Bring these notes on the symbols and possible interpretations to our next class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a short essay (4-6 pages) compare at least two of the assigned poems. Your paper
should define, discuss, and analyze the basis for comparison (form/style, motifs/theme,
figurative language), the relevance of the comparison, and the insight we gain by seeing
these poems in relation to one another rather than separately.
2. Read Lu Xun's "Preface to a Call to Arms" and "Diary of a Madman" and write a
Blackboard discussion post that identifies at least two major uses of irony in each text.
Begin by formulating Lu Xun's broader purpose in both pieces for your reader, then
analyze the possible functions of two different examples and explain how these ironies
relate to his broader purpose. Once you've completed your post, choose one of your
classmates' posts, and, using specific examples from that post, analyze and evaluate your
classmate's arguments.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend one of the suggested literary events (a reading or performance) and write a short
response (1-2 pages) that critiques the work(s) presented using appropriate literary
terminology.
2. Choose one novel from the list of suggested novels, and choose one of the critical
frameworks we've discussed. Find an example of an analysis of some aspect of this novel
that uses this same framework. This example should give you an idea of how that writer
defines the scope of her/his project. Then decide on the limits of your scope, your own
topic, and use your chosen framework to write an analysis of your novel that you will
present to the class on your assigned day. Be sure that your topic is not the same as the
topic in the example that you found, and you must submit both your written analysis and a
copy of your example on the day of your presentation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Meyer, Michael. The Bedford Introduction to Literature . 9th Edition. Bedford/St. Martin's ,
2010.
B. David Damrosch. The Longman Anthology of World Literature Volume F. Second Edition.
Pearson/Longman, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Additional literary works chosen by the instructor that reflect human diversity.

Created/Revised by: Kiara Koenig
Date: 12/03/2012

