BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 219 - Composition Workshop I
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 217 or English Level II
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course prepares students for ENGL 119. Students will further develop basic composition, critical
reading, and critical thinking skills. The focus will be on producing a variety of vocational and
academic written texts, including essays, reports, reviews, summaries, quick writes, and journals.
Students will also develop an understanding of the choices writers make in different writing situations.
Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use the writing process to generate and organize ideas, draft, revise, edit and proofread.
B. Write a variety of unified, organized, well-developed texts.
C. Analyze purpose and audience and use appropriate language, tone, structure, format,
punctuation and grammar for different rhetorical situations.
D. Write academic text, developing a central point or claim and support.
E. Use strategies for developing vocabulary.
F. Employ critical reading skills for inquiry, dialogue, response, and critique.
G. Practice thoughtful critique of own work and the work of others.
H. Contribute own insights, both written and verbal, to academic dialogue.
I. Use information technologies to support writing.
J. Evaluate, integrate, and document sources at a basic level.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Writing process
2. Analyzing audience and purpose
3. Recognizing writer’s choices (language, tone, structure)
4. Organizing, developing, and unifying ideas
5. Writing effective sentences
6. Using technologies to support writing
7. Close, analytical reading
8. Critical reading for specific purposes (inquiry, dialogue, response, and
critique)
9. Employing strategies for developing vocabulary
10. Critiquing own work
11. Critiquing the work of others
12. Engaging in academic dialogue
13. Evaluating sources

Hours
4.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
8.00
6.00
5.00
5.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00

14. Integrating sources
15. Documenting sources
Total Hours

3.00
2.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Individual consultation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Essay based exam (optional)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “Brainology” and compare attitudes and behaviors of people with fixed mindset and
growth mindset.
2. Read “Is Harry Potter Evil?” and be prepared to discuss your own ideas about censorship.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After reading “Brainology,” write a journal entry in which you examine your own mindset
and offer specific examples from your experience.
2. Write a peer response offering feedback to a classmate on his/her paper.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Go to the Center for Academic Success and ask for feedback on your draft from a writing
tutor.
2. After revising, assess your own writing using self-assessment questions.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Mangelsdorf, K. and Posey, E.. Choices: A Basic Writing Guide with Readings. 4th Edition.
Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2008.
B. Anker, S.. Real Writing with Readings. 5th Edition. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. A college level dictionary

Created/Revised by: Teresa Ward
Date: 03/25/2013

