BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 8 - British Literature I
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 118 or ENGL 119 or English Level IV
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introductory survey to the seminal works, genres and eras of the development of
literature in English in the British Isles, from the early Medieval to the Renaissance and 17th century,
to conclude with the Augustan literature of the 18th century. It is designed for students seeking an
introductory survey of British literature, its figures, and movements. Authors include Chaucer,
Spenser, Milton, Shakespeare, Swift, and others. (C-ID ENGL 160). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Analyze and interpret the literature and intellectual movements of each period.
E. Demonstrate understanding of appropriate academic discourse and the conventions of literary
analysis.
F. Demonstrate comprehension of the above through class discussions, oral and written responses,
written exams, and essays.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course and Literary Study

Hours
3.00

a. Literary terms
b. Themes and context
c. Chronological and thematic evelopment of English language
and literature (These topics will be reiterated and reinforced
throughout the course).

2. Old English and the Medieval Period
a. The age of migrations and the Anglo-Saxon world view
b. Celtic influences and the "Matter of Britain"
Major work and authors: Beowulf, the Bede, Anglo-Saxon, Chronicle,
Geoffrey of Monmouth

8.00

3. High Medieval and the Court of Richard II

10.00

a. The cultural flowering of Chucerian England
b. Monastic influences and the tensions of proto-Reformation
Major works and authors: Gawain and the Green Knight, Chaucer's
Canterbury Tales, William Langland, Julian of Norwich, Margery
Kempe, Everyman
4. Renaissance England

10.00

a. the age of the sonnet and the sonnet cycle
b. Literature and Tudor power
c. The birth and flowering of the English theater
Major authors: Sidney, Spenser, Marlowe, Raleigh, Shakespeare
5. The Seventeenth Century

10.00

a. The inward turn: the literature of meditation and essay
b. Jacobean unrest, regicide, and the English Civil War
c. Epic conceptions and the Restoration
Major works and authors: Donne, Jonson, Bacon, Burton, The English
Bible, Webster, Hobbes, Marvell, Traherne, Vaughn, Milton
6. The Eighteenth Century

10.00

a. Enlightenment:The Age of Reason
b. The age of wit and satire
Major works and authors: Swift's Gulliver's Travels, Pope, Dryden,
Johnson
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Small Group Work
G. Analytical Research Projects
H. Methods may also include one or more of the following:
1. Interactive Journals
2. Student Oral Presentations
3. Internet/Online Research
I. Students are expected to write a minimum of 4000 words for this course.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Final Examination
B. Short papers

C. Essays and research papers
D. Class Discussion
E. Analytical Research Projects
F. Methods may also include one or more of the following:
1. Interactive journals
2. Oral presentations
3. Smaller analytical papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the literary work assigned by your instructor, choose two quotations from the work,
analyze the meanings of the quotes and explain how you think they connect to the theme
of the work as a whole.
2. Evaluate one classmate's literary analysis,and offer suggestions for deepening it. Think
about the ways your own interpretation of the work differed from your classmate's and
offer these different perspectives. Select additional quotes from the literary selection to
question, debate, or add to your classmate's analysis.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Chose one of the assigned literary works to articulate a specific question that has emerged
from your reading and analysis of it. Use that question to help you formulate a thesis that
you can support and develop in a formal essay. Be sure to consistently synthesize specific
details from your chosen literary work and outside research, and come to a logical
conclusion that develops the implications of your thesis for your audience.
2. Articulate a specific question that has emerged from your comparison of two of the
assigned literary works, and formulate a thesis about that question. Compose a formal
essay, supporting and developing your thesis. Consistently synthesizing specific details
from your chosen literary works and outside research, come to a logical conclusion that
develops for your audience the implications of your thesis.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Select two or more of the assigned literary works from a particular period, and research
their historical and cultural contexts, using this new information to deepen your analyses
of those works.
2. Choose one or two of the assigned authors, and research specific circumstances of their
lives and times that might have influenced their literary productions. Select the most
relevant information to further inform and develop your analysis of the authors and their
texts.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. -. The Norton Anthology of English Literature, Volume I. 9th Edition. W.W. Norton, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Literary Works: Beowulf, The Canterbury Tales, The Fairie Queene, King Lear, Twelfth Night,
Paradise Lost, Gulliver’s Travels and/or other appropriate selections.

Created/Revised by: Frances Gibbons
Date: 12/03/2012

