BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 11 - Communication and Critical Thinking
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course offers instruction in argumentation and critical writing, critical thinking, analytical
evaluation of texts, research strategies, information literacy, and proper documentation. (C-ID ENGL
105).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Critically read, analyze, compare, and evaluate complex texts
B. Demonstrate understanding of formal and informal fallacies in language and thought
C. Identify a text's premises and assumptions in various social, historical, cultural, psychological,
or aesthetic contexts
D. Analyze and employ logical and structural methods such as inductive and deductive reasoning,
cause and effect, and logos, ethos, and pathos
E. Compose thesis-driven arguments to suit a variety of rhetorical situations, including
interpretation, evaluation, and analysis,and support them with a variety of appropriate textual
evidence and examples
F. Find, analyze, interpret, and evaluate primary and secondary sources, incorporating them into
written essays using appropriate documentation format without plagiarism
G. Use style, diction, and tone appropriate to the academic community and the purpose of the
specific writing task; proofread and edit essays for presentation so they exhibit no disruptive
errors in English grammar, usage, or punctuation
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fundamentals of Written and Oral Argument
2. Logical Fallacies
3. Rhetoric and Reasoning
4. Impediments to Cogent Reasoning
5. Evaluating Extended Written and Oral Arguments
6. Persuasion and the State
7. Advertising and the Media
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
7.00
8.00
7.00
8.00
7.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Reading and Writing (6000-8000 words writing requirement)
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Mid-term and final examinations
H. Short papers
I. Essays and research papers
J. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and interpret the section of the text assigned by the instructor. Be prepared to work
in small groups identifying whether or not a passage is an argument, and if it is, identify
the parts of the argument.
2. Read the section of the text assigned by the instructor and evaluate specific fallacies and
definitions found in the section. Be prepared to identify the fallacies in class when given
examples by the instructor.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In formal essay form, respond to one of the course films to articulate how it demonstrates
specific, critical thinking-based concepts. Be sure to consistently synthesize specific
evidence from the film to illustrate and support those concepts.
2. After reading an opinion-editorial that your instructor provides, write an analysis of the
op-ed (two pages, double-spaced) specifically addressing the rhetorical strategies of the
piece and identify any fallacies (make sure to explain why the fallacy is a fallacy).
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. After locating a print advertisement, write a two page, double-spaced analysis of the
visual rhetoric explicitly and implicitly used in the advert and identify the fallacies
(remember to include why a fallacy is a specific fallacy and include a summary of your
interpretation of what you "see" on the page).
2. Watch or listen to a political debate that your instructor has assigned and take notes during
the debate, specifically listening for rhetorical strategies, appeals, use of premises and
support, and identify any fallacies. Attach notes to a one page, double-spaced critique of
the debate.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Cavender, Nancy M. & Kahane, Howard. Logic and Contemporary Rhetoric. 12th Edition.
Wadsworth, Cengage Learning, 2013.
B. Chaffee, John. Thinking Critically. 10th Edition. Wadsworth, Cengage Learning, 2012.
C. Ruggerio, Vincent Ryan. The Art of Thinking. 10th Edition. Pearson, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts and websites assigned by instructor

Created/Revised by: Jennifer White
Date: 12/03/2012

