BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 60 - Creative Writing: Fiction
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course develops an awareness of literary fiction as an art form both through the reading of short
works of fiction and writing of exercises and complete stories. Emphasis is placed on the development
of essential elements necessary for the writing of fiction and on the workshop format as a method for
developing understanding and analysis of fiction. The assignments are interconnected in order to help
students incorporate the skills they are practicing into increasingly difficult pieces. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze works of fiction both canonical and original, identifying elements of plot, character,
dialog, setting, point of view, and style.
B. Identify forms of figurative language and style in their readings of published short fiction and
apply these terms accurately to new works, including those by students in the class.
C. Develop ability to employ figurative language and an artistic voice in their own original work.
D. Participate in workshops in which students provide each other with critical estimations of their
work.
E. Begin and complete projects of complexity and length -- for example, two short stories or
chapters of a novel.
F. Develop the ability to use elements of fiction such as scene, plot, dialog, character, setting, and
point of view in their original exercises and longer works of fiction.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Character Development
2.
Plot and Story Structure
3.
Setting
4.
Dialog
5.
Point of View
6.
Imagery, Metaphor, and Symbolism
7.
Analysis of Literature
8.
Peer Critique
9.
Revision
10. Inspiration
11. Formatting
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
7.00
4.00
15.00
2.00
3.00
1.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Reading Assignments
G. Writing exercises
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Class participation
E. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Lead the critique of a story by one other student in the class. Start by giving an overall
evaluation of the story, indicating what elements of story the author wrote well, and
suggest improvements in at least two elements. End by posing a discussion question about
the story to the rest of the class.
2. Read the assigned work, analyzing the elements of fiction and annotating the text. From
this create a written response.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Structure a scene between two characters paying attention to dialogue, plot and language.
2. Write a short story of at least three pages where setting is a strong element affecting
character, plot, and mood.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend one fiction reading during the semester and write a review of the author's work,
including a short plot summary and discussion of character, setting, point of view, and
style.
2. Using a short story not previously assigned from our assigned text, choose ten terms from
our glossary and apply the terms accurately to situations in the story.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Ford, Richard. The Granta Book of the American Short Story: Volume Two. Granta Books ,
2012.
B. Steele, Alexander, ed. Gotham Writers’ Workshop: Writing Fiction. 1st Edition. Bloomsbury
USA, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Access to personal computer, flash drive, printer.

Created/Revised by: Molly Emmons
Date: 04/29/2013

