BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 31 - Existential Literature: A Literary Approach to Self Integration
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

Through a variety of short stories, novels and poems dealing with existential themes, this course will
help the student explore the literary, psychological, philosophical and theological implications of
defining and taking responsibility for oneself in the quest for self-actualization. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Analyze and evaluate the choices of characters represented in specific examples of world
existential literature. Assess the degree to which these characters suggest that a consciously
integrated, physiological, social, and psychological being may achieve greater success or not
and what this might tell us about the choices we make in life and the potential consequences of
these choices that we must face and learn from.
E. Question and assess the applicability to our own lives of major existential principles; facing
potential meaninglessness or nothingness, acting from a position of more or less blindness, and
accepting the full responsibility for the consequences of choices and attempting to learn from
them.
F. Question and assess the potential use of existential concepts to find healthier attitudes or
responses to questions and problems surrounding substance abuse, sexuality, mental health,
stress management, sustainable living, aging, death and dying.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course
2. Existence Before Essence

Hours
1.50
4.50

a. The subjective and the personal vs. objective and the impersonal
b. The sensory system as a conduit to the world and perception as a
process for the discovery of reality
3. The Impotence of Reason

4.50

3. The Impotence of Reason

4.50

a. Holistic approaches to mental, physical and spiritual health
4. Alienation and Anxiety

4.50

a. Alienation from God, nature, others, and our true selves
b. Managing stress to improve our well being and our connections to
others and ourselves
5. The Encounter with Nothingness

4.50

a. The inevitability of death and decay
b. Substance abuse and unhealthy coping mechanisms
c. Genetic programming and teleomeres and the aging process
d. Existential acceptance as a means of mitigating physiological
regression
6. Freedom and Existential Responsibility

4.50

a. Metacogintion as a means of becoming "self-surpassing"
b. Healthy, self-affirming choices
c. Existential freedom, the environment and society, and responsibility
7. Authenticity vs. Inauthenticity

4.50

a. Fulfillment of potential vs. denial of potential
b. Fuller integration of the body/mind/spirit
c. Escaping the pitfalls of learned helplessness
8. Good Faith vs. Bad Faith

4.50

a. Candor, honesty and sincerity vs. self deception and the denial of
the true self
b. Healthy intrapersonal and interpersonal relationships
c. Physical and emotional relationship between bad faith and bad
health
9. I-Thou and I-it Relationships

4.50

a. Objectifying the other as existential inauthenticity
10. The Absurd

4.50

a. Life and ultimate meaning
b. The lack of meaning and the negating or debasing of life
c. Creating meaning vs. looking for meaning from outside ourselves
11. Contingency (Chance vs. Fate)

4.50

a.The idea of predestination vs. positive choices and actions
12. Courage and Love in a Paradoxical World

4.50

12. Courage and Love in a Paradoxical World

4.50

a. Developmental stages of life
b. Need for courage to face the truth of existence and make right
choices
c. Lifelong commitment to personal and social wellness as integrated
physiological and psychological entities
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Reading Assignments
G. Journal and essay writing to deepen student inquiry into readings.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Journal
C. Short papers
D. Essays and research papers
E. Book reports
F. Class Discussion
G. A minimum of 4,000 words required writing
H. Maintenance of a personal reflection journal
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Lu Xun's "Iron House Parable" and use Sartre's "Existentialism as Humanism" to
critically evaluate the ethical dilemmas presented by Lu Xun. Then use Lu Xun to
critically evaluate and question the ethical arguments made by Sartre.
2. Read Kierkegaard's "Is There Such a Thing as the Teleological Suspension of the
Ethical?" As you annotate the text, critically evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of his
arguments and the evidence on which they are based. Then identify the potential problems
his arguments might create when we apply them to real-life ethical choices.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a formal character analysis (at least 750 words) of one character or an analytical
comparison/contrast of two characters in Sartre's *No Exit*. Explain how these characters
represent the conflict between bad faith and good faith and authenticity and inauthenticity.
2. Read the excerpts from Simone de Beauvoir's *The Second Sex* and analyze and
critically evaluate (in at least 750 words) the arguments she makes about a specifically
feminine relationship to existentialist concepts like authenticity, good faith, and courage
before the void. In what ways does she support and further develop Sartre's arguments,
and in what ways does she undermine them?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend at least one local theater production and write an analysis of the way the play and
the particular interpretation of it by the director, scene designers and actors represent key
Existentialist concepts that we've addressed up to that point in the semester.

2. Choose a novel from the assigned reading list, and prepare a presentation for the class
explaining how the major existentialist concepts we have covered so far are exemplified
in that novel and what you think the overall message of that novel is and why.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Solomon, Robert C. Ed.. Existentialism. 2nd Edition. Oxford University Press, 2004.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Specific texts and individual authors to be determined by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: Amy Antongiovanni
Date: 04/29/2013

