BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 47 - Native American Literature
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course will examine a diverse selection of Native American literary texts from the eighteenth
century to the present. Emphasis is placed on historical and cultural context as well as on how texts
authored by Native Americans have contributed to U.S. culture and history.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Distinguish the major themes, motifs, and stylistics of traditional and contemporary Native
American literature.
E. Define the ways oral literacy, storytelling, tribal sovereignty, land rights, place, survival humor,
gender constructions, and tribal community are issues central to critical reading and writing
about Native American literature.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Oral tradition
2. Overview of the impact of Native American history and of U.S. law
concerning Native Americans in Native American written literature
3. Stereotypes: Vicious primitives and noble savages
4. Early Native American writings, including the 18th and 19th centuries
5. Native American literature from 1900-1970
6. Native American Renaissance: 1970-present
7. Trickster tales
8. Spirit and nature
9. Bicultural conflicts and perspectives
10. Women and gender in Native American literary texts
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
7.00
10.00
20.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Class participation
C. Final Examination
D. Short papers
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
G. Students will be expected to write a minimum of 6,000 words
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned selection from instructor and distinguish a theme in the text that we've
discussed in class. Construct an argument using evidence from the text as your support
and be prepared to present your argument to the class.
2. Read two selections from the text and compare how each author addresses the same
theme. Be prepared to discuss the comparisons in small group discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page critique of an assigned reading that evaluates the socioeconomic
influences on character, setting, and/or language.
2. Compose a persuasive essay, in four to five pages, illustrating a theme we've discussed in
class. Use the text as support as well as two academic sources from our college library's
database.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Listen to a recording of a live storytelling event (or attend an event) and develop a criteria
list of rhetorical moves unique to the Native American oral tradition. Write a two to three
page analysis comparing the rhetorical moves of the oral tradition to the rhetorical moves
of contemporary Native American literature. Be prepared to present your analysis to the
class and to further the discussion of why differences and similarities exist between the
two modes of storytelling.
2. Conduct and transcribe an interview with a member of a local tribe. Focus the interview on
the individual's experience with storytelling (either as a storyteller or a story-listener or
both or neither). Write a two to three page evaluation of the interview that compares what
the person interviewed states as her/his experience with storytelling with the storytelling
experience of an established contemporary Native American writer. The evaluation should
not make any conclusions, but rather compare how different or similar the established
contemporary Native American writer and the Native American individual regard
storytelling. Bring the transcription and evaluation to class to discuss the implications of
our research.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Purdy, John L. and James Ruppert. Nothing But the Truth: An Anthology of Native American
Literature. Pearson Publishers, 2001.
B. Gansworth, Eric, ed.. Sovereign Bones:New Native American Writing. Vol. 2 Edition. Nation
Books, 2007.
C. Deloria, Philip J. Indians in Unexpected Places (Culture America) . University Press of Kansas,
2006.
D. Lobo, Susan, Steve Talbot, and Tracy L.Morris. Native American Voices. 3rd Edition. Longman
Pearson Publishers, 2009.
E. Rainwater, Catherine. Dreams of Fiery Stars: The Transformations of Native American Fiction.
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Current News Articles
B. Internet Sites
C. Audio/Visual Materials
D. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Jennifer White
Date: 04/15/2013

