BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 119 - Composition Workshop II
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 219 or English Level III
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course prepares students for college-level writing. Students will implement strategies for
comprehending, analyzing, critiquing, and responding to readings in organized and logically
developed essays. Additionally, students will conduct basic research and evaluation of sources.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Write essays that have a clear thesis/claim, integrate support for that claim, progress logically,
and conclude effectively
B. Find, evaluate, and appropriately document supporting evidence
C. Read texts critically and analytically, identifying key points and drawing logical conclusions
D. Identify and write for specific audiences and purposes
E. Recognize the difference between revision and editing, and apply strategies for both to improve
his or her own essays
F. Demonstrate effective sentence variety and diction
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Close, Analytical and Critical Reading
A. identifying main and supporting points
B. understanding audience and purpose
C. recognizing rhetorical strategies and evaluating assumptions
D. evaluating evidence
E. comparing and contrasting alternative interpretations
2.
Research strategies
A. introduction to library resources
B. basic strategies for evaluating sources
C. basic strategies for synthesizing sources and using them to develop and
support theses
D. basic documentation practices and reasons for properly documenting
research
3.
Essay construction and writing process
A. effectively responding to different writing assignments
B. developing effective theses
C. mining texts for supporting evidence
D. summarizing, paraphrasing and quoting

Hours
12.00

12.00

27.00

E. avoiding plagiarism
F. effectively integrating and developing points from sources
G. progressing coherently and logically between sentences and paragraphs
H. appealing to specific audiences
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Individual Conferences/Tutoring
F. A minimum of 5,000 words will be written
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Carefully read and take notes on a selection assigned by the instructor. Examine the use of
details, examples, statistics and/or quotations in order to prepare for a class discussion on
audience.
2. Carefully read and take notes on a selection assigned by the instructor. Identify the thesis
and evaluate at least three examples of support for the thesis.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay in which you evaluate the author’s argument in the selected reading.
Appraise and assess numerous details, examples, and quotes from the text to support your
evaluation.
2. Write an essay comparing the theses of related texts assigned by the instructor. Explain
what each thesis claims, why it is accurate or not, and judge which thesis is most
convincing.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Collect and assemble three tips for creating a strong thesis from college or university
websites. Compose three practice thesis statements using the tips.
2. Using our college’s databases, research and analyze two articles that address the theme of
a reading selected by the instructor. Bring these articles to class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Ehrenreich, Barbara. Nickel and Dimed. 1st Edition. Metropolitan, 2001.
B. Skloot, Rebecca. The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks. 1st Edition. Crown Books, 2010.
C. Slater, Lauren. Opening Skinner's Box: Great Psychology Experiments of the Twentieth
Century . 1st Edition. Norton, 2005.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:

A. Film, video and other electronic or print resources.
B. The Purdue Online Writing Lab (OWL)

Created/Revised by: Cheryl Battles
Date: 03/25/2013

