BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 21 - Mythology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introductory survey of selected mythologies, including Greek, Hindu, Chinese,
Biblical, Native American/Traditional, Mayan/Toltec/Aztec, European, African, and others. Emphasis
is on the cultural importance of the stories and the religious importance of the rituals surrounding the
myths. The course will include readings from mythology and scholarly works on mythology. The goal
of this course is to produce an understanding of the function and force of mythology. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Compare and contrast several mythological systems.
E. Analyze the classic myths of western culture and other myths from around the world.
F. Differentiate between archetypes and motifs, and assess the role of those archetypes or motifs in
several texts.
G. Evaluate the relevance of mythology in the artwork, belief systems, and social norms of
contemporary cultures, as well as the role(s) myths may play in the student's own life.
H. Analyze how mythology influences literature, film, music, and art.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Myth and the Modern World
2. The Indigenous Cosmos – The Sacred and Profane
3. Babylonia and The Garden Of Eden
4. The Egyptian and Greek Connection
5. Archetypes and Heroes
6. The Gift of the Goddess
7. Contemporary Mythology and the Eternal Return
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
10.00
5.00
10.00
9.00
4.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Critical Reading
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Class participation
C. Mid-term and final examinations
D. Essays and research papers
E. Persuasive Research Paper (a minimum of 4000 words will be written for this Course)
F. Presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned selection on Joseph Campbell's monomyth and evaluate its relationship
to a contemporary narrative. Be prepared to present your evaluation of the narrative's use
or adaption of the various stages described in the monomyth during class discussion.
2. Read the assigned chapter(s) on archetypes and motifs. Pick a single archetype or motif
and compare and contrast the role that archetype/motif plays in two or more of the
cultures we're studying, using specific myths or tales to support your comparison. Share
your findings with the class in a ten-minute presentation.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a five to seven page paper, formulate an interpretation of the role that an archetype
such as the femme fatale, the trickster, or the dying god, plays in contemporary culture. To
support your interpretation, you may draw from literature, film, and art, as well as sports,
politics, and psychology.
2. In a 1-2 page response, analyze the role of the guide and the use of repetition in The Story
of Jumping Mouse.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In a five to seven page paper, analyze an epic narrative and assess the ways in which that
narrative influenced a given culture, reflects a particular historical era, or captures a
particular worldview.
2. Watch Michael Wood's In Search of Myths & Heroes: King Arthur, and be prepared to use
the ideas presented to discuss and evaluate the potential historical underpinnings of the
Arthurian Legend in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Thury, E.M. & Devinney, M.K.. Introduction to World Mythology. Third Edition. Oxford
University Press, 2013.
B. Campbell, Joseph. The Hero With a Thousand Faces. Bollingen, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Kiara Koenig
Date: 02/25/2013

