BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 6 - Creative Writing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: ENGL 2 English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the craft of creative writing through the study and analysis of the
works of established and peer writers. Students will practice writing in various genres and will be
introduced to the workshop method. (C-ID ENGL 200). Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate use of literary techniques in the production of original works in different genres.
B. Read professional and student texts actively and critically.
C. Use the writers' workshop and/or peer and instructor feedback to evaluate their own manuscript
as well as the manuscripts of others.
D. Participate in a community of writers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Craft techniques for writing literary poems
2. Craft techniques for wriitng literary fiction & non-fiction
3. Methods of revision for critical analysis of student work and published
writers.
4. Analysis of contemporary literature in at least two genres.
5. Participation in student workshops and community of writers.
Total Hours

Hours
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Writing workshops in class or on line
I. Public readings (applies to both in class and on line students)
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios

C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Homework
F. Journal
G. Class participation
H. Written Assignments
I. Written Examinations
J. Written or Oral Examinations
K. Writing assignments (min. 4000 words)
L. Creative Writing manuscripts
M. Written and oral analytical critiques
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and analyze assigned poems. Compare and contrast the poets' use of form and voice
in each, and analyze the efficacy of each strategy. Be prepared to discuss your findings.
2. Analyze one of the assigned texts for use of basic literary techniques, e.g. image,
metaphor, and symbolism. Be prepared to present findings in class discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Compose a poem focusing on elements of craft, e.g. image,line, voice, style, form. No
more than 250 words.
2. Write a one-act play in which you develop the characters and action through dialogue and
stage directions. Use any of the genre's conventions to create a well-defined,
character-driven world. Minimum 500 words.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a literary reading/ lecture and write a critical essay about the reading/lecture.
Research the writer's work and write an analysis of it. 250-1000 words
2. Write a short story in which you develop characters through dialogue and action. Consider
the use of metaphor, repetition of imagery, and the effectiveness of the setting in the
context of the plot. 500-3000 words
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Addonizio, Kim and Dorianne Laux. The Poet's Companion: A Guide to the Pleasures of
Writing Poetry. Norton, 1997.
B. Minot, Stephen. Three Genres: The Writing of Poetry, Fiction, and Drama. 7th Edition.
Prentice-Hall, 2003.
C. Alice LaPlante . The Making of a Story: A Norton Guide to Creative Writing. 1st Edition.
Norton, 2009.
D. Minot, Steven. Three Genres. latest Edition. Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2010.
E. King, Stephen. On Writing. Pocket Books, 2009.
F. Burroway, Janet. . Imaginative Writing. latest Edition. Penguin, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. A contemporary book of poems and/or a contempoary book of literary fiction

Created/Revised by: Amy Antongiovanni
Date: 04/15/2013

