BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGL 45 - Latino Literature and its Latin American Roots
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of Latino and Latina authors in the United States. The course will trace the
origin of Latino works to the literature and culture of various Latin American countries, and then it
will demonstrate how Latino literature emerged as a unique artistic form in the United States. All
works will be studied within their historical, political, social, gender, economic, and geographical
contexts. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze themes within course texts and compare them to the ways these themes are treated in
other course texts.
B. Synthesize analyses of specific details in particular works of literature in support of a clear,
overall point or thesis.
C. Identify, employ and evaluate different frameworks for analyzing and interpreting literature.
These frameworks may include political, socioeconomic, geographical, ethnic, cultural,
ecological, psychoanalytical, historical, gender, sexuality, and genre development.
D. Identify the ways Latino literature has diversified, and demonstrate increased awareness of the
importance of change in all human pursuits.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Pre-Columbian and Post-Columbian Beginnings
a, The Meeting of two sensibilities the Spanish and the Native American
b. The Latin American as an intercultural being
c. Forging new and fluid identities
2. Poetry: Nobel Prize Winners and their Intellectual-Artistic Offspring
a. Solutions to existential dilemmas: creativity and love
b. Search for historical continuity and a Chicano identity
c. The African-Latin rhythm of some Latino poetry
d. Poems of the exploited and marginalized
e. The uniqueness of Latino imagery
3. The Short Story
a. The labyrinthine entanglement of past and present in the formation of
identities
b. The syncretism and multiculturalism of the Latin world
c. The use of the imagination in the search for a unifying vision
4. The Novel

Hours
10.00

10.00

10.00

10.00

4. The Novel
a. Cultural and literary debts to Spain and other civilizations
b. The force of culture, of history, and of the landscape
c. Linguistic lavishness, ornamentation, self-absorption, and surrealism in
Latin
d. novels (Cervantes’s continuing presence)
e. Magic Realism conquers the world
f. The multivocal and multilingual literature of the Americas
5. Memoirs: Telling Life
a. The individual self: masks and self-revelation
b. Discovering and forming a new collective identity
c. Decoding and relating to new lands and new cultures
d. Remembering and reinventing the past
Total Hours

10.00

11.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Guest Speakers
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Class participation
C. Short papers
D. Essays and research papers
E. Class Discussion
F. Students will write a minimum of 4000 words.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and be prepared to discuss in class the literary work assigned by your instructor,
choose two quotations from the work, analyze the meanings of the quotes and explain
how you think they connect to the theme of the work as a whole.
2. Evaluate one classmate's analysis of the text assigned by your instructor, and offer
suggestions for deepening it during class discussion. Think about the ways your own
interpretation of the work differed from your classmate's and offer your different
perspectives. Select additional quotes from the literary selection to question, debate, or
add to your classmate's analysis.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Choose one of the assigned literary works to articulate a specific question that has
emerged from your reading and analysis of it. Use that question to formulate a thesis that
you can support and develop in a formal 1500-word essay. Be sure to consistently
synthesize specific details from your chosen literary work and outside research, and come
to a logical conclusion that develops the implications of your thesis for your audience.
2. Articulate a specific question that has emerged from your comparison of two of the
assigned literary works, and formulate a thesis about that question. Compose a formal
2500-word essay supporting and developing your thesis. Consistently synthesizing

specific details from your chosen literary works and outside research, come to a logical
conclusion that develops for your audience the implications of your thesis.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Select two or more of the assigned literary works from a particular period, and research
their historical and cultural contexts as they apply to gender equality. Use this new
information to deepen your analyses of those works
2. Choose one or two of the assigned authors, and research specific circumstances of their
lives and times, such as their social and financial status, that might have influenced their
literary productions.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Stavans, Ilan. The Norton Anthology of Latino Literature. 1st Edition. Norton, 2011.
B. Marquez Garcia, Gabriel. Cien Anos de Soledad. Conmemoratica Edition. Real Academia
Espanola, 2007.
C. Neruda, Pablo. Twenty Love Poem and a Song of Despair. Penguin Books, 2004.
D. Augenbraum, Harold and Olmos Fernandez, Margarite. The Latino Reader. Houghton Mifflin,
1997.
E. Allende, Isabel. House of the Spirits. Dial Press Trade Paperback, 2009.
F. Cofer, Judith Ortiz. The Latin Deli: Telling the Lives of Barrio Women. W. W. Norton &
Company, 2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Various handouts provided by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: Frances Gibbons
Date: 02/25/2013

