BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGR 1 - Introduction to Engineering
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

The course explores the branches of engineering, the functions of an engineer, and the industries in
which engineers work. Explains the engineering education pathways and explores effective strategies
for students to reach their full academic potential. Presents an introduction to the methods and tools of
engineering problem solving and design including the interface of the engineer with society and
engineering ethics. Develops communication skills pertinent to the engineering profession.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the role of engineers in society and classify the different engineering branches, the
functions of an engineer, and industries in which they work.
B. Identify and describe academic pathways to bachelor’s degrees.
C. Develop and apply effective strategies to succeed academically.
D. Explain engineering ethical principles and standards.
E. Demonstrate knowledge of effective practices for writing technical engineering documents and
making oral presentations.
F. Analyze engineering problems using the engineering design process.
G. Demonstrate teamwork skills in working on an engineering design team.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Role of engineers in society and comparison of engineering, science and
technology
2. Professional Licensing and engineering profession – branches, functions,
industries, careers, job outlook
3. Professionalism and ethics
4. Learning Skills in Engineering education: academic success, curriculum,
pathways, preparation for upper division coursework
5. Written and oral communication skills related to engineering
6. Branches of Engineering
7. Engineering Statistics: salaries, work environment, life-work balance
8. Exposure to modern engineering tools and practices
9. Basic systems used in most every machine such as sensors, pneumatics,
hydraulics, bearings, bushings, gears, belts and pulleys, clutches and brakes,
and framing materials. AC and DC motor control, simple electrical circuits,
machine controllers, programming, testing and analysis of results
10. Introduction to design process
11. Exposure to real world engineer through field trips and or guest speakers

Hours
2.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
4.00

4.00
5.00

Total Hours

34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Final Examination
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on the code of ethics for Engineers and be prepared to discuss specific
cases in which Engineers make decisions based on their professional ethical code.
2. Read the chapter on team work and be prepared to discuss the 4-steps method that guides
the decision process during an engineering project.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write two pages to respond to the following questions. What kind of Engineer would you
like to become? Why? Search on websites such as www.glassdoor.com and
http://www.nspe.org and find out about salary, work-life balance and locations for your
chosen engineering career.
2. Based on the 4-steps method, write about the different possibilities to address the problem
assigned with your project. Address all of the different options and the steps you took to
pick a specific option to complete the project.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Use a spreadsheet to design a GANTT project timeline for the assigned project.
2. Complete an education plan that includes every class along with its prerequisites, laid out
by semester for a degree in engineering.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Stephan, E. A., Park, W. J. Thinking Like an Engineer: An Active Learning Approach. 3rd
Edition. Pearson, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Francesco Madaro
Date: 04/06/2015

