BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ENGR 17 - Electrical Circuits and Devices
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 42, MATH 40 (or concurrent enrollment)
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

4 Unit(s)

An introduction to the analysis, construction and measurement of electrical circuits. Use of analytical
techniques based on the application of circuit laws and network theorems. Basic use of electrical test
and measurement instruments including multimeters, oscilloscopes, power supplies, and function
generators. Use of circuit simulation software. Interpretation of measured and simulated data based on
principles of circuit analysis for Direct Current (DC), analysis, transient, and sinusoidal steady-state
Alternating Current (AC) conditions containing resistors, capacitors, inductors, dependent sources,
operational amplifiers and /or switches. Elementary circuit design. Practical considerations such as
component value tolerance and non-ideal aspects of laboratory instruments. Construction and
measurement of basic operational amplifier circuits. Natural and forced responses of first and second
order RLC circuits; the use of phasors; AC power calculations; power transfer; and energy concepts.
(C-ID ENGR 260/260L).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze DC circuits to find current, voltage, resistance, power, and/or energy.
B. Draw and label circuit diagrams and show thorough mathematical solutions.
C. Apply different circuit analysis techniques and demonstrate a process for selecting an
appropriate technique for a given problem.
D. Solve circuits containing two or more Op Amps.
E. Find the transient response and complete response for RC, RL, and RLC circuits involving DC
sources.
F. Solve AC circuits by using Phasors.
G. Calculate average and complex power for AC circuits.
H. Access and use the most basic functions of electrical test and measurement equipment including
oscilloscopes, multimeters, function generators and power supplies. (Lab)
I. Read circuit schematics and construct linear circuits using resistors, capacitors, inductors,
and/or op amps. (Lab)
J. Measure resistance, DC and AC voltages, current, and power, and experimentally verify the
results for a variety of electrical circuits. (Lab)
K. Test circuits, analyze data and compare measured performance to theory and simulation. (Lab)
L. Use a circuit simulation program (PSPICE, MultiSIM) and other computer applications
(MATLAB, MS Excel) to predict or describe circuit behavior. (Lab)
M. Troubleshoot and repair simple electric circuits. (Lab)
N. Record and document results of lab work using text and graphs. (Lab)
O. Work effectively in groups by sharing responsibilities and collaborating on findings. (Lab)
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics

Hours

1. Ohm’s Law
2. Electrical Power and Energy
3. Kirchhoff’s Laws
4. Equivalent Circuits
5. Voltage and Current Division
6. Dependent Sources
7. Nodal and Mesh Analysis
8. Thevenin and Norton Equivalent Circuits
9. Superposition
10. Operational Amplifiers and Analysis using Ideal Models
11. Voltage gain and current limitations of non-ideal op amp circuits
12. Transient and Complete response of RC, RL, and RLC Circuits
13. Sinusoidal steady-state analysis including phasors, complex impedance, and
power factor
14. Frequency response of first and second order AC circuits
15. AC Power including power transfer and power factor correction
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

Lab
Topics
1. Test and measurement equipments: Use of each item for specific purposes.
2. Circuit construction techniques for laboratory use (“breadboarding”)
3. Component identification and labeling; nominal and measured values;
limitations on voltage, current, power dissipation
4. Verifying lecture concepts: Kirchoff's Current Law (KCL); Kirchoff's
Voltage Law (KVL); Ohm’s Law; Voltage and Current Division; Power
dissipation; Series and Parallel Circuits; Equivalent circuits; Thevenin
equivalent circuit; and Superposition
5. Operational Amplifiers and the practical voltage and current limits on the
output of these devices
6. Step response of RL, RC, and RLC circuits
7. Frequency response of RL, RC, and RLC circuits (including resonance)
8. Laboratory Safety
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
12.00

6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes

C. Research Projects
D. Homework
E. Lab Projects
F. Laboratory Reports
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on equivalent circuits and be able to discuss derivations in class.
2. Read the oscilloscope owners manual and be prepared to discuss and apply information to
analysis of results in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a 3 page paper explain the physical principles and characteristics of common circuit
elements including resistors, inductors, capacitors, transistors and diodes.
2. In a 3 page paper concisely and accurately describe source bench laboratory activities
including goals, process and results.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research operating specs for elements online and be prepared to discuss effects on circuits
in class.
2. Research the circuitry for a cappuccino machine and write a 2 page summary including
diagram.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Nilsson, J. & Riedel, S. Electric Circuits. 10th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2014.
B. Thomas, R.E., Rosa, A.J., Toussaint, G.J. The Analysis and Design of Linear Circuits. 7th
Edition. Wiley, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Francesco Madaro
Date: 03/02/2015

