BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FASH 80 - Retail Fashion Buying
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the process of buying fashion merchandise for ultimate purchase by
consumers. Topics include the principles and practical application of fashion buying, the role of the
fashion buyer and the techniques of handling the complete buying-selling cycle.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and evaluate the responsibilities of a buyer for various sizes and types of stores.
B. Identify the characteristics that make fashion buying a unique process.
C. Analyze consumer motivation in purchasing.
D. Classify, compare, and use various systems to plan, select, and control merchandise assortments.
E. Evaluate, select, and work with items of fashion merchandise.
F. Formulate effective pricing criteria of merchandise for resale.
G. Identify, interpret, and apply the processes and procedures of the buying-selling cycle for
fashion products.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Introduction/Orientation
2.
The Uniqueness of Fashion Buying
3.
The Fashion Buyer’s Responsibilities
4.
Organization of Buying
5.
Resident Buying Offices
6.
Analyzing the Fashion Customer
7.
Planning the Fashion Assortment
8.
Selecting Fashion Assortments
9.
Controlling Fashion Assortment
10. Fashion Merchandise Resources
11. Pricing Fashion Merchandise for Resale
12. Buyer Communications
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Fashion Trend Analysis (Essay)
C. Workbook Assignments (Computational)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on globalization in retailing in your text and be prepared to discuss with
the class how the effects of globalization have influenced retailing.
2. Read the chapter on brick and mortar retailing in ”Retailing in the 20th Century" and be
prepared to discuss how local retailers are categorized by types of retail operations
described in the text.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 4-5 page market research paper about a local retailer you have visited and an
owner or manager you have interviewed. Describe the target market, retailer image,
advertising and promotion methods, and merchandise assortment.
2. Write a 4 page paper about a current fashion trend. Pay particular attention to the
demographic following this trend.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Select and read a current article from a trade publication from the provided list and share
with the class.
2. Use the Internet to research an online retailer and report to the class how the company
provides customer service.
3. Use the Internet to research an online retailer and report to the class how the company
provides customer service.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Diamond and Litt. Retailing in the 20th Century. 2 Edition. Fairchild/Bloomsbury, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Julie Demaggio
Date: 04/28/2014

