BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FASH 6 - Understanding Fibers, Fabric, and Textiles
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to fibers and their origin, yarns, basic weaves and fabric finishes, with
reference to fabric selection for use in fashion and interior design. Emphasis is placed on the selection,
use and care of new fibers and fabrics. The course also examines the impacts of textile laws,
regulations and trade agreements.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Select a fiber or fabric for its inherent characteristics to use for an end product or garment.
B. Analyze a product or garment from conception to manufacturing to a finished product.
C. Evaluate a fiber or fabric for its aesthetics, durability, safety, care and cost of the finished
product or garment.
D. Identify and describe the impact of textile laws, regulations and trade associations that are
relevant to the textile industry.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction/Orientation
2. Textile Industry
3. Natural Fibers
4. Manufactured Fibers
5. Yarns and Sewing Threads
6. Woven Fabrics
7. Knitted and Other Non-Woven Fabrics
8. Textile Dying
9. Textile Printing
10. Textile Finishing
11. Care and Repair of Textiles
12. Textile Laws, Regulations and Trade Associations
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
8.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture

C. Multimedia Presentations
D. Demonstrations and Experiments
E. Class Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Written Assignments
C. Notebook
D. Exams
E. Textile Project
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read articles provided by the instructor about upcoming apparel and textile shows. Pay
particular attention to current trends in the textile industry. Be prepared for in-class
discussion.
2. Read about careers in the textile industry. Identify a particular career potentially of interest
to you. Learn about job prospects, desired qualifications, working conditions, salary and
opportunities for advancement. Prepare for in-class discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 3 to 5 page paper pertaining to a textile law or regulation, or to a textile-related
trade association. Discuss the historical context and the current impact of the law,
regulation or trade assocation.
2. Write a 3 to 5 page research paper about a fiber or fabric used to make garments and/or
end products. Describe the history of the fiber, the chemistry and/or production of the
fiber, the characteristics of the fiber and the environmental impact of the production
process.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using your Textile Swatch Kit, pull apart swatches to identify yarns, contruction
technology, dying and printing techniques, applied finishes and thread counts. Determine
the appropriate end use for each of the swatches. The final report for this semester-long
project will be approximately 50 pages long.
2. Develop an idea for a product utilizing a fiber or fabric that meets the serviceability
concept. Decide on the best fiber or fabric for the end product. Determine if it will meet
the criteria of aesthetics, durability, comfort, safety, appearance retention, care and cost.
Also, consider the environmental impact of manufacturing or production. Make a product
prototype. Submit a one page executive summary and journal acccounting for the time and
cost involved in creating your prototype.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cohen, A.C., Johnson, I., Pizzuto, J.J. Fabric Science. 10th Edition. Fairchild, 2011.
B. Cohen, A.C., Johnson, I., Pizzuto, J.J. Fabric Science Swatch Kit. 10th Edition. Fairchild, 2011.
C. Kadolph, Sarah J. Textiles Basics. 1st Edition. Prentice Hall, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Julie Demaggio
Date: 04/28/2014

