BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FN 2 - Nutrition
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the scientific concepts of nutrition related to the function of nutrients in basic
life processes and current health issues with emphasis on individual needs. (C-ID NUTR 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify function and sources of nutrients for each stage of the life cycle.
B. Demonstrate basic knowledge of nutrient digestion, absorption, and metabolism.
C. Apply dietary guidelines and current nutrition recommendations.
D. Scientifically analyze and evaluate nutrition information.
E. Relate nutrition to health, fitness, and disease.
F. Utilize a computer database to analyze a personal diet record and evaluate its strengths and
weaknesses through a written diet project.
G. Describe the scientific method and how it is used in nutrition research.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Dietary Guidelines and Nutrition Recommendations
3. Digestion and Absorption
4. Carbohydrates and Diabetes
5. Lipids and Heart Disease
6. Protein and Vegetarian Diets
7. Metabolism
8. Vitamins
9. Water and Minerals
10. Energy Balance, Weight Management, and Eating Disorders
11. Fitness
12. Pregnancy and Infant Nutrition
13. Child and Adolescent Nutrition
14. Elderly Nutrition
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Written Assignments
E. Class Discussion
F. Dietary Analysis
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read two articles about childhood obesity and be prepared to discuss the causes and
treatment strategies in class.
2. Read about two nutrition-related gastrointestional (GI) disorders and be ready to describe
each disorder including risk factors and treatment options in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a five page written evaluation of your diet based on an analysis of your
three-day food records. Identify nutrient deficiencies and discuss food sources for the
missing nutrients. Develop a one-day menu that will meet recommended levels for all
nutrients.
2. Research a current and controversial issue in nutrition and write a three- to five-page essay
on the topic. Refer to the International Food Information Council’s (IFIC) website to
review publications on nutrition controversies. Your discussion should contain both pros
and cons of the topic and include your position based upon the scientific evidence
identified in your research. Be prepared to discuss your findings in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Go to the WebMD website and complete three different nutrition related quizzes. For each
quiz, report your score and determine two things that you can do, that will raise your score
(improve your health).
2. Obtain nutrition information from a fast food restaurant and calculate the calorie, fat and
sodium levels of a typical meal. Design a new meal from this restaurant that is one-third
lower in all three nutrients.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Smith, A.M. Wardlaw's Contemporary Nutrition. 10th Edition. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016.
B. Schiff, W.J. Nutrition for Healthy Living. 4th Edition. McGraw-Hill Education, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Materials Other Than Textbooks: A. Connect for Smith: Wardlaw's Contemporary Nutrition, 4th
ed. B. Connect for Schiff: Nutrition for Healthy Living, 4th ed. C. Handouts, supplementary
materials and Internet websites,

Created/Revised by: Brenda Stagner
Date: 03/07/2016

