BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FN 10 - Food Safety and Sanitation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to principles of food safety and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control
Points (HACCP) as it applies to the food industry. As part of the course a student may receive a
ServSafe® Certification from the National Restaurant Association Education Foundation and an
approved HACCP certification if he or she receives a minimum of 75% on the respective
examinations.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the classifications of microbes that cause food borne illness.
B. Identify the actions needed to respond to a food borne illness outbreak and other applicable
health hazards.
C. Prepare and present a staff training on a food safety topic.
D. Describe and analyze the systems that must be in place for a HACCP plan to successfully
prevent food borne illness.
E. Apply the seven principles of an effective HACCP plan to a food establishment and/or
manufacturing industry.
F. Explain the relationship between a HACCP plan and the Food Safety Modernization Act
(FSMA).
G. Construct a HACCP plan for a food manufacturer.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Food Safety
2. Causes of food borne illness and contamination
3. Flow of Food in Food Service Establishment
4. Food Safety Managerial Control and Crisis Management Systems
5. Facilities and Equipment safety, cleaning and regulation standards
6. Staff Training
7. Introduction to the HACCP plan and the FSMA
8. National FDA Food Code and California Retail Food Code
9. HACCP Principles in the Industry and Hazard Identification
10. Foundation for HACCP: Prerequisite Programs
11. Seven principles of building a HACCP Plan
12. Flow of Food (Farm to Table)
13. Implementation of a HACCP plan
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
9.00
3.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read three articles about the Food Safety and Modernization Act (FSMA). Be ready to
discuss in class the goal of the FSMA and how it will affect food manufacturers.
2. Read the Food Borne Illness Case Study presented in the handout. Be prepared to discuss
in class the FDA and USDA regulations that apply to this case and what agencies would
get involved in this type of outbreak.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Go to the Butte County Health Department's website that lists the Health inspections for
area restaurants. Choose three restaurant inspection reports and complete a one-page paper
outlining the contents of each report. Next, design a staff training that would be
appropriate based on one of the inspection reports reviewed.
2. Review assigned food borne illness case studies in both retail and manufacturing
environments. Write a one-page paper analyzing what actions could have prevented the
outbreak and what staff training procedures would be appropriate to prevent future
outbreaks.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Design and present a HACCP plan for a food manufacturing facility, due at the end of the
semester. The HACCP plan must address the current food laws and regulations as well as
requirements levied by the FSMA. The project will be constructed using the seven
principles for building a HACCP plan and must include and address prerequisite programs
pertinent to the food manufacturer being discussed. The assignment is expected to be
between 8-10 typewritten pages (not including schematics) and will be completed over the
last half of the semester.
2. Construct and present a staff training at the end of the ServSafe portion of the course.
Topic examples include: Personal Hygiene, Controlling Time and Temperature,
Preventing Cross Contamination, Cleaning and Sanitizing Technique. The training must
include a well-designed, written handout for the training participants. The training
assignment must also include an outline with goals and objectives for the training.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bianco, S., Doyle P. HACCP Fundamentals with Scantron. 2nd Edition. Kendall Hunt, 2014.

B. National Restaurant Association. ServSafe® Coursebook. 6th Edition. National Restaurant
Association, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Brenda Stagner
Date: 03/07/2016

