BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FSC 105 - Fire Academy Physical Training
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): FSC 106
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
9 hours Lecture
95 hours Lab

2.5 Unit(s)

This course prepares fire science students for the pre-employment physical ability test in the
Firefighter I Academy. Emphasis is placed on lifetime fitness, principles of physical fitness, individual
fitness programs, managing body composition, stress indicators and management, nutrition,
development of muscular strength and cardiovascular efficiency. Students will undergo physical
assessment at the onset and conclusion of the course. This course meets California State Fire Marshall
certification requirements.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the basic principles of physical conditioning.
B. Describe the components of a personal physical fitness program.
C. Develop an effective personal fitness program.
D. Explain the basic principles of nutrition.
E. Demonstrate the ability to pass a standard fire fighter employment physical ability examination.
F. Identify and describe the basic concepts of stress management.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Components of a personal physical fitness program
2. Techniques for evaluating personal fitness
3. Physical conditioning of firefighter performance
4. Components of a physical conditioning program and a training session
5. Training injuries and treatment
6. Nutritional planning and fitness goals
7. Stress management
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
9.00

Lab
Topics
1. Components of a personal physical fitness program
2. Practical training/functional performance
3. Physical agility event technique training
4. Physical agility course test practice
Total Hours

Hours
20.00
25.00
25.00
25.00
95.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Oral examinations
C. Timed physical assessments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout on safety and injury prevention techniques for athletic training, and be
prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read an article about the benefits of physical fitness training for firefighters, and be
prepared to discuss in small groups in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a journal for one week tracking everything that you eat. Be prepared to share your
journal during a class discussion on nutrition.
2. List the components of the firefighter physical agility course, and describe briefly the
relevance of each component to the firefighting profession.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare and maintain a written log which details your out-of-class physical training
efforts. Be prepared to share in class and discuss.
2. Visit a fire station, observe what facilities are specifically utilized for physical fitness
training and be prepared to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Athletic apparel
B. Athletic shoes
C. Other materials and/or equipment will be provided by the department

Created/Revised by: Marshall Haslem
Date: 11/18/2013

