BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FSC 2 - Introduction to Fire Science
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the history and philosophy of the fire service and concepts of fire
protection. It includes study of fire organizations and career opportunities in the fire service and
related fields; fire loss analysis and the impact of fire on society; public, quasi-public and private fire
protection services; specific fire protection techniques and functions; and an introduction to fire
chemistry and physics.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the impact of fire on society.
B. Describe the history, functions and general goals of fire protection.
C. Describe various types of fire protection organizations, and identify career opportunities in fire
protection and related fields.
D. Describe the general process of fire loss analysis.
E. Critically analyze the relative effectiveness of specific fire protection concepts, past and present,
utilized in the response to fires.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. History and philosophy of fire protection.
2. Fire protection functions.
3. Fire protection organizations and career opportunities.
4. Public fire protection services.
5. Quasi-public fire protection services.
6. Private fire protection services.
7. Fire loss analysis and the impact of fire on society.
8. Introduction to fire chemistry.
9. The physics of fire.
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
7.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
4.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Reading Assignments

F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Handouts
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Projects
C. Class participation
D. Written Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a textbook chapter on organizations related to the fire service, and successfully pass
a quiz on the chapter.
2. Read an instructor provided article on the history of the fire service, and be prepared to
discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a minimum one page autobiography which describes your interest in the study of
fire technology.
2. Prepare a minimum two page formatted report describing your tour of a local fire
department.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare a PowerPoint presentation which overviews a local fire service agency.
2. Arrange and participate in a tour of a local fire department, and be prpeared to discuss in
class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. IFSTA. Fire Service Orientation and Terminology. 5th Edition. IFSTA, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Michael Maloney
Date: 05/04/2015

