BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FSC 8 - Personal Fire Safety
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides students who are interested in careers in the fire service with an overview of
injury prevention and general safety techniques for utilization while conducting routine and
emergency fire operations.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the most commonly occurring firefighter injuries and describe associated prevention
techniques.
B. Demonstrate basic rescue procedures.
C. Identify and describe correction procedures for common fire dangers in residential and
commercial structures.
D. Identify circumstances for use of various fire extinguishing devices, and demonstrate their
proper use.
E. Describe how to implement "Operation EDITH" (Exit Drills in the Home).
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Management of emergency scenes
2. Fire scene hazards
3. Fire scene hazard mitigation
4. Firefighter injuries and injury prevention
5. Personal protective equipment (PPE)
6. Basic rescue procedures
7. Concepts of occupational health and safety
8. National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
9. Safety drills and fire detection devices for home and industry
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
6.00
6.00
8.00
8.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Audiovisual
D. Handouts

D. Handouts
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Locate and read an article on "Firefighting Close Calls" related to a fire fighter
line-of-duty fatality, and be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read a texbook chapter on emergency scene management, and be prepared to take a quiz
in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a tri-fold holiday safety brochure for homeowners.
2. Write a minimum one page report on a fatal or "near-miss" fire incident.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a fire department chief officer about fire fighter safety using instructor-provided
questions as a format, and be prepared to make a presentation in class about the interview.
2. In conjunction with an assigned group, prepare and present a safety presentation to the
class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. James S. Angle. Occupational Safety and Health in the Emergency Services. 3rd Edition.
Cengage Learning, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Michael Maloney
Date: 05/04/2015

