BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FSC 12 - Fundamentals of Fire Prevention
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course will introduce students to the concepts and function of fire prevention. It will include an
introduction to inspections; recognition of fire and life hazards; engineering a solution of a fire hazard;
enforcing the solution of a fire hazard; and public relations as affected by fire prevention.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain basic principles and procedures of fire prevention.
B. Identify what organizations are responsible for fire prevention, and describe the laws that
provide a basis for fire prevention.
C. Explain the purpose of classifying occupancies by degree of fire, degree of life safety hazards,
and degree of common and special fire hazards.
D. Identify and explain the operations of fire detection, signaling and fire suppression systems.
E. Explain the significance of public education as a component of fire prevention.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. History and overview of fire prevention
2. Organization and procedures related to fire prevention
3. Fire prevention public education
4. Laws, regulations, standards and prevention organizations
5. Introduction to inspection and inspection procedures
6. Building Construction
7. Fire protection equipment and supression systems
8. Fire detection and signaling equipment
9. Causes and degrees of fire
10. Storage, heating and housekeeping hazards
11. Electrical hazards
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Handouts

D. Audiovisual
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
D. Written Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Locate and read an article about a historic fire event at a specified type of structure, and be
prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read a chapter from the textbook degrees of fire, and be prepared to complete a worksheet
on the material.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a topic related to fire prevention, and write a minimum two page report.
2. Develop an educational fire prevention brochure suitable for publication and distribution.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct a fire prevention inspection of a specified type of structure, and be prepared to
discuss in class.
2. Prepare a Powerpoint presentation detailing your group's inspection of a unique type of
structure.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. IFSTA. Fire Inspection and Code Enforcement. 7th Edition. Fire Protection Publications, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Michael Maloney
Date: 05/04/2015

