BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FSC 203Z - Fire and Safety Training Orientation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
8 hours Lecture
32 hours Lab

1.1 Unit(s)

This course will cover Basic Fire Suppression tactics and Rescue skills. Its focus will be on creating a
diverse and non-threatening learning environment for the education of youth in safety, rescue and
emergency activities. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate safe and effective procedures in the use of all assigned tools and equipment.
B. Follow safety procedures for all fire suppression and rescue tactics.
C. Exhibit good crew interactions.
D. Demonstrate good team support.
E. Demonstrate enhanced leadership skills.
F. Demonstrate positive communication skills
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. General Goals
1. The course will provide the student with the knowledge and skills necessary to recognize
and apply appropriate safety procedures, demonstrate use of fire suppression equipment,
learn basic law enforcement techniques, achieve CPR certification and perform basic
duties as an organized crew member. It will provide empowerment and confidence for
students through team building. In addition, it will enhance strong leadership, role
modeling and encourage mentoring. Skills and proficiency will support a sound work ethic
and broaden problem solving abilities. Students will develop an understanding of team
support and cohesive work environment.
B. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
1. Team Building and Physical Fitness Exercises
2. Introduction to Fire Suppression and Law Enforcement Skills
3. Rescue Skills and EMS Skills
4. Fire Suppression and Rescue Application
Lecture
Topics
1. Team Building and Physical Fitness Activities
2. Intro. to Fire Suppression and Law Enf. Skills
3. Rescue Skills & EMS Skills
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
4.00
8.00

Lab
Topics
1. Team Building and Physical Fitness Activities
2. Intro. to Fire Suppression and Law Enf. Skills
3. Rescue Skills & EMS Skills
4. Fire Suppression and Rescue Application
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
9.00
10.00
10.00
32.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Real-life Demonstrations and Proficiency Exercises
E. Homework: Students of Butte College are normally expected to study a minimum of two (2)
hours outside of class for each hour of instruction. However, under Campblaze guidelines and
requirements, attendance and participation for this course meet the required standards.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Participation in discussions and exercises
B. Demonstration of skill set
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Reference Materials
C. Public Safety Equipment from various agencies
D. Power Point and DVD/VHS

Created/Revised by: Marshall Haslem
Date: 04/17/2006

