BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FSC 16 - Fire Company Organization and Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to fire department organizations. It includes an overview of
organizational structure, and an in depth examination of the role of the company officer. Planning,
organizing, supervising and managing to meet the needs of the fire department mission are
emphasized.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the organization and management of fire departments.
B. Identify key components of fire company organization, and describe fundamental aspects of fire
company operations.
C. Describe the role, responsibilities and duties of a fire company officer.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fire department organizations
2. Mobile equipment and personnel resources
3. Fire department facilities and essential equipment
4. Introduction to fire company operations
5. Role and responsibilities of the company officer
6. Company management
7. Company supervision
8. Company role in personal safety
9. Company training and coaching
10. Company role in fire prevention
11. Company role in fire investigation
12. Company recordkeeping and records
13. Disaster preparedness planning
14. Incident management practices
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
4.00
2.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Diagnostic Tests
F. Case Studies
G. Visual Aids
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
D. Written Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a chapter in the textbook on mobile fire equipment resources, and be prepared to
complete a twenty question worksheet based on the reading.
2. Read an assigned case study about a company officer leadership failure, and be prepared
to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 2-3 page paper describing the historic "Rattlesnake Incident," and identifying
three leadership lessons that have been learned from the tragedy.
2. Write a minimum two page paper summarizing an interview with a fire department
company officer and identifying at least three key roles of company officers.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Produce a 3-5 minute video marketing presentation for a fire department entry-level
firefighter recruitment.
2. Conduct an interview with a company officer in a local fire department and identify
specific experiences that are illustrative of the fundamental roles of company officers.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Clinton H. Smoke. Company Officer. 3rd Edition. Delmar Cengage Learning, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Michael Maloney
Date: 05/04/2015

