BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
FSC 14 - Fire Protection Equipment and Systems
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces the student to a variety of fire protection equipment and systems. It will include
installation, maintenance and operation of detection and suppression systems, as well as an
examination of the suppression of special types of hazards.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Recognize and identify various types of fire detection and supression systems.
B. Describe the function and operations of various types of sprinkler systems.
C. Identify, compare and contrast the types, classifications and uses of fire extinguishers.
D. Identify special types of hazards and describe related suppression methods.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fire protection systems and detection vs. supression
2. Installation, maintenance, operation and testing of fire protection systems
3. Detection systems
4. Fire alarms
5. Supression systems
6. Sprinkler systems
7. Water supplies
8. Fire extinguisher types and uses
9. Special hazard supression and smoke management systems
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Discussion
C. Demonstrations
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments

Hours
4.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
6.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
5.00
51.00

D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter on detection systems, and be prepared to discuss the proper
application of systems in class.
2. Read an article about an historic municipal fire where there were no fire protection
systems in place. Be prepared to discuss protection system flaws in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a minimum two page report about a historic municipal fire, and describe the impact
of the presence or absence of a fire protection system.
2. Prepare a consise reference sheet with mathematical formulas for calculating hydraulic
equations.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Participate in a ride-along with a fire inspector, inspect a building and locate and identify
the fire protection systems it has. Be prepared to describe your experience in class.
2. Prepare a Power Point presentaion regarding the importance of fire protection systems,
and be prepared to present and discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. IFSTA. Fire Detection and Suppression Systems. 4th Edition. IFSTA, 2011.
B. IFSTA. Pumping Apparatus Driver/Operator Handbook. 2nd Edition. IFSTA, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Audiovisual

Created/Revised by: Michael Maloney
Date: 05/04/2015

