BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GEOG 22 - Remote Sensing and Spatial Analysis
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course covers Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for investigating geographic patterns,
relationships and connections. Spatial analysis methods are employed for both raster and vector data.
Emphasis is on problem-solving and decision making using GIS. Models and scripts for automating
GIS processes are also undertaken. In addition, remote sensing fundamentals as they apply to mapping
the Earth’s surface will be covered. Image enhancement, classification and quantitative techniques are
explored with attention to integration with GIS datasets. Application of remote sensing for land cover
change, vegetation classification, and environmental quality are explored.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Distinguish between conventional statistical analyses to spatial analysis.
B. Identify and use basic sampling methods used in GIS.
C. Compare and interpret geographically referenced data.
D. Analyze problems associated with acquisition and accuracy of data used in spatial analysis.
E. Examine the problems associated with statistical analysis and quantification of spatial features.
F. Analyze and manipulate geographically referenced data, and apply spatial analysis in the
decision making process.
G. Identify the principles of remote sensing and digital image processing.
H. Identify the applications of remote sensing and GIS to solve real world problems.
I. Apply experience in the use of image processing and GIS software.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Brief overview of GIS
2. Spatial Data
3. Quantifications of Spatial Features
4. Single-layer operations
5. Multi-layer Operations
6. Analysis of Point Features
7. Network Analysis
8. Spatial Modeling
9. Surface Analysis
10. Grid Analysis
11. Spatial Analysis in Decision Making
12. Principles of aerial photography and satellite remote sensing

Hours
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

Total Hours

34.00
Lab

Topics
1. Fundamental Spatial Analysis
2. Point Pattern Analysis
3. Line Data Analysis
4. Network Analysis
5. Surface Analysis
6. 3-D Analysis
7. Remote Sensing Learning
8. Remote Sensing Principles
9. Remote Sensing Interpretation and Use
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Homework
E. Lab Projects
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Module One, Enhancing Images, and prepare to discuss the different procedures to
improve the visual appearance of an image, allowing for easier interpretation.
2. Read an article, choosing a popular or peer reviewed publication, from your particular
field of interest that deals with the use of GIS spatial analysis within that discipline.
Prepare an oral presentation for in class discussion based upon the use.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 500 word response focusing on the history of GIS use in water resources to the
following article: Use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in Water Resources: A
Review.
2. Write a 750 word critique investigating the potential of GIS as powerful evidence-based
practice tools for early problem detection and solving, from the article: Towards
evidence-based, GIS-driven national spatial health information infrastructure and
surveillance services in the United Kingdom.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments

1. Prepare a poster that outlines your final project and include the flow diagram as created in
Model Builder in ArcGIS. A Powerpoint poster template is available on Blackboard.
2. Complete one of the three ESRI Virtual Campus courses: Creating and Integrating Data
for Natural Resource Applications, Performing Spatial Interpolation Using ArcGIS,
Distance Analysis Using ArcGIS, and present your certificate of completion for
assignment credit.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Keranen, K., Kolvoord, R. Making Spatial Decisions Using GIS and Remote Sensing: A
Workbook . 1st Edition. ESRI Press, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Randy Cousineau
Date: 11/16/2015

