BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GEOG 4 - Cultural Geography
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of diverse human populations, their cultural origins, diffusion and contemporary
spatial expressions. Topics include: demography, languages and religions, urbanization and landscape
modification, political units and nationalism, and economic systems and development. (C-ID GEOG
120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate an understanding of the distribution of the human population and the processes
(both historical and contemporary) that shape this distribution.
B. Demonstrate an understanding of the origins, diversity, and distribution of basic cultural
patterns, with particular attention given to: language, religion, urbanization, political and
economic patterns, and human-environment interactions
C. Demonstrate an understanding of basic concepts used in the geographic study of human patterns
including: diffusion, cultural landscapes, cultural ecology, and cultural regions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The distribution of the human population and the processes (both historical
and contemporary) that shape this distribution
2. The origins, diversity, and distribution of basic cultural patterns, with
particular attention given to: language, religion, urbanization, political and
economic patterns, and human-environment interactions
3. Basic concepts used in the geographic study of human patterns including:
diffusion, cultural landscapes, cultural ecology, and cultural regions
Total Hours

Hours
17.00
17.00

17.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Multimedia Presentations
D. Participation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes

C. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article in your collateral text that concerns residential patterns in midtown
Manhattan, New York. Be prepared to discuss how and why millionaires and people on
welfare live so close to one another (particularly near Central Park East).
2. Read the chapter in you text that deals with human migration patterns. Be prepared to
discuss what is meant by “push/pull” factors. How did these factors shape the movement
west across North America of Euroamerican populations. We will discuss these ideas in
class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a short essay (2 pages) on the “cultural use of space.” Compare and contrast the
example from Japan with the settlement pattern associated with the Amazon Basin.
2. Write a research paper (1500 words) contrasting the 17th century Plantation system in the
southern United States with the industrial northeast. Focus on land usage, economy, and
any cultural predispositions for the two regions that you deem important. How did these
two different cultural patterns affect cultural institutions (e.g. the institution of slavery for
example).
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend our field trip to downtown Oroville. Take notes on different neighborhood
characteristics and propose some hypotheses to explain these patterns based on historical
factors. Present your findings in class.
2. Walk around and through our campus. Using sketch maps try to develop a sense of the
temporal (over time)development of building sequencing at Butte College. We will
compare your field notes and maps with actual data obtained from our Land Use
Committee.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rubenstein, Rand. Cultural Landscape: Introduction to Human Geography. 9th Edition. Pearson,
2008.
B. Rountree. Globalization and Diversity. 2nd Edition. Pearson, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/04/2013

