BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GEOG 20 - Introduction to Geographic Information Systems
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

Study of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) science and its applications to spatial data
management. Identification and acquisition of GIS data. Assessment of vector and raster systems,
scale, resolution, map projection, coordinate systems, georeferencing and Global Positioning Systems
(GPS). Spatial analysis and modeling with GIS. Explores how GIS solves spatial problems, such as
those in natural resources, earth and life sciences, environmental planning, local government, business,
transportation and other fields. (C-ID GEOG 155).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define Geographic Information Systems (GIS).
B. Identify and evaluate GIS data sources and the importance of metadata.
C. Demonstrate the process of converting analogue data to digital data for use in a GIS
D. Identify, compare and contrast vector and raster GIS.
E. Evaluate the capabilities of various GIS software programs.
F. Apply cartographic principles of scale, resolution, projection and data management to a problem
of a geographic nature.
G. Apply spatial analysis functions on a GIS to solve a Geospatial problem.
H. Plan, evaluate and execute a GIS project: Identify a problem of a geospatial nature; outline a
strategy to solve the problem; locate relevant data sources; design and evaluate a plan to acquire
the relevant data sources; incorporate data sources into a Geographic Information System and
execute strategy to solve a geospatial problem; apply principles of spatial analysis; and present
results (Lab activity).
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fundamental Concepts in Geographic Information Systems
a. Definition of GIS
b. Vector and raster systems
c. Scale and resolution
d. Map projections and coordinate systems
e. Applications of GIS
f. Basics of cartographic design
2. GIS Data Sources

Hours
4.00

6.00

2. GIS Data Sources
a. Identify sources of GIS data
b. Metadata
c. Georeferencing and Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
d. Converting digital data to a uniform projection and scale
e. Vector-to-raster and raster-to-vector data conversions, error propagation
3. Designing and Implementing a GIS
a. User needs assessment
b. Database design and management
c. Fundamentals of data storage
d. Database management
e. Input of data with GPS
f. Digitizing, scanning, editing and output
4. Spatial Analysis
a. Map algebra
b. Buffering
c. Interpolation and surface analysis
d. Network analysis
e. Applications in decision-making
f. Modeling
Total Hours

6.00

12.00

12.00

34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Exploring ArcMap
2. Exploring ArcCatalog
3. Symbolizing features and rasters
4. Classifying features and rasters
5. Labeling features
6. Querying data
7. Joining and relating tables
8. Selecting features by location
9. Preparing data for analysis
10. Analyzing spatial data
11. Projecting data in ArcMap
12. Building geodatabases
13. Creating features
14. Editing features and attributes
15. Geocoding addresses
16. Making maps from templates
17. Making maps for presentation
18. Plan, evaluate and execute a GIS project
19. Identify a problem of a geospatial nature
20. Outline a strategy to solve the problem
21. Locate relevant data sources
22. Design and evaluate a plan to acquire the relevant data source

Hours
1.50
1.50
3.00
3.00
2.00
2.50
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
1.00
1.50
1.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
2.00
1.75
1.75
1.75
1.75
1.75

23. Incorporate data sources into a Geographic Information System and
execute strategy to solve a geospatial problem
24. Apply principles of spatial analysis
25. Present results
Total Hours

1.75
1.75
1.75
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Demonstration
C. Homework
D. Lab Projects
E. Written Assignments
F. Written Examinations
G. Performance Examinations
H. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter "Exploring ArcMap(Getting to Know ArcGIS)," and be prepared to
discuss the importance of choosing the correct symbology and various sources of feature
classes.
2. Read the journal article found in Module 3: GIS-Based Generalization and Multiple
Representation of Spatial Data, and be prepared to discuss the importance of
generalization of symbology as a cartographic tool.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 500 word review of the journal article, "GIS-based simulation of land use
change," provided by the instructor.
2. Write a 750 word research paper concerning the applications of mobile GIS, including the
implications of this technological advancement.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Find ten examples of cartographic symbology from maps found on the internet,
representing the evolution of cartographic symbology over time. Prepare a 500 word paper
discussing those changes and include examples of your selection. You may find a large
collection of historic and contemporary maps at:
http://www.davidrumsey.com/
2. Write a 1,000 word research report comparing the various GIS software programs
available, including open-source freeware. Prepare a scientific poster using Powerpoint (or
similar program) presenting your results orally in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Ormsby, T., Napoleon, E., Burke, R., Groessl, C., Bowden, L. Getting to Know ArcGIS. 2nd
Edition. ESRI, 2010.
B. Bolstad, P. GIS Fundamentals. 4th Edition. Eider Press, 2012.
C. Law, M. Collins, A. Getting to Know ArcGIS. 4th Edition. ESRI, 2015.

Created/Revised by: Randy Cousineau
Date: 11/16/2015

