BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GEOG 12 - The American West
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

A topical survey of the American West from the Great Plains to the Pacific, emphasizing both
historical and contemporary interpretations of settlement, resource management, economic
development, and urbanization. Particular emphasis is placed on how various cultural groups with
differing social, political, and religious values have each made a unique impact upon the western
landscape.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. analyze the physical character of the landscape.
B. recognize migration and settlement patterns of various cultural groups.
C. describe the development of regional interconnectedness and economic dependency.
D. compare and contrast urban and rural land use policies.
E. formulate reasoned opinions about the future of the American West.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: Definitions of the American West; symbols and myths;
perceptions.
2. Landforms, climate, and vegetation
3. Water: transfer and distribution; federal and state water projects; politics of
water
4. Mineral resources: distribution of energy resources: fossil fuel landscapes
5. Discovery and exploration: Indigenous cultures; European conquest; Lewis
and Clark; Great Surveys
6. Peopling the West: Mormon settlements; Gold Rush; transportation systems
(railroads and interstates); Dust Bowl migration; Spanish 'reconquest'; SE
Asian immigration; politics and policies of immigration.
7. Economic activities: agriculture; ranching; lumbering; fishing; mining;
industry; military
8. Resource management: public Lands; National Parks; preservation vis-à-vis
conservation.
9. The Urban West; sunbelt Metropolises; ethnic settlements; future
landscapes.
10. The future of the American West
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
9.00

9.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Map drawing and analysis
H. Independent investigation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class participation
D. Oral reports
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Garreau, Joel. The Nine Nations of North America. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981.
B. Washington, D.C.. Atlas of North America: Space Age Portrait of a Planet. National Geographic
Society, 2008.
C. Byrd, K., Rissman and A.M. Mevelender. Impacts of Conservation essement Threats in
Ruralwoodland Landscape. Urban Planning Press, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 10/19/2009

