BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GEOG 10 - Geography of California
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

A thematic approach to the state’s issues, processes and topics relevant to geography including
climate, landforms, natural vegetation, water resources, cultural landscape, ethnic diversity, urban and
agricultural regions, and the economy. This course explores the physical, and human landscapes that
have evolved as a result of the human-environment interface. (C-ID GEOG 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Examine the physical processes which shape the natural environments of California.
B. Analyze the use of natural resources in the state, particularly the role of water in the
development of both the economic and cultural landscapes of California.
C. Analyze the influence of varying cultural and ethnic groups in the shaping of the cultural
landscapes of California.
D. Evaluate the origins and development of agriculture and industry in California.
E. Compare patterns of urban development in the state and evaluate current and future trends.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The major physical elements ofCalifornia
a. Landforms
b. Climate
c. Vegetation
d. Soil
e. Water resources
2. The human geography ofCalifornia
a. Population and distribution
b. Economic activities
c. Cultural landscapes
d. Political Landscapes
Total Hours

Hours
25.50

25.50

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture

E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Report(s)/assignments
1. Each student will be required to meet a 2,500 word writing requirement.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in your text that describes the history of California State Parks. Be able
to discuss how the criteria for Park formation was developed and laid out.
2. Read the article on the use of “Green Zones” to differentiate between rural farm areas and
areas set aside for residential expansion. Be prepared to discuss the issues from both
perspectives (i.e. from the farmer’s view and semi-urban developer’s view).
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a short essay describing what happened to the large Rancherias in Northern Central
California after the Bear Flag revolt of 1846. Note in your paper how the aftermath of the
revolt changed the demographics of Northern Central California.
2. Write a paper summarizing the “Gorge Project”(early 1950s) of the Owen’s Valley. Note
the impact this project had on creating tensions within California. In other words, how this
project set up the “Water Wars.” Note in your paper how this conflict persists today.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Take part in our field trip to the Sutter Buttes. Take notes on what our guide tells us about
the formation of the Buttes and how this unique formation shaped local plant and animal
conservation. Be prepared to discuss your experience in class.
2. Attend our annual field trip to Table Mountain. Take notes on water drainage, plant life,
zonation, and other important ecological features (e.g. rock and soil types) as mentioned in
our brief tour. Be prepared to discuss you experience in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Donley, Mike, et al. Atlas of California. (Atlas of California Authors), 2008.
B. Hornbeck, David. California Patterns: A Geographical and Historical Atlas. Palo Alto, CA.:
Mayfield Publishing co., 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. California Highway Map
B. Lapp, Rudolph: Afro-Americans in California
C. Camerillo, Albert: Chicanos in California
D. California Wine Advisory Board; The Story of Wine; (pamphlet)
E. Chan, Sucheng: Asian Californians
F. Maps, charts, and graphs distributed by instructor of record.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/04/2013

