BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GEOG 2 - Physical Geography
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a spatial study of the Earth’s dynamic physical systems and processes. Topics include:
Earth-sun geometry, weather, climate, water, landforms, soil, and the biosphere. Emphasis is on the
interrelationships among environmental and human systems and processes and their resulting patterns
and distributions. Tools of geographic inquiry are also briefly covered; they may include: maps,
remote sensing, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and Global Positioning Systems (GPS). (C-ID
GEOG 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate an understanding of the size, shape, and movements of the Earth in space and their
importance to environmental patterns and processes.
B. Demonstrate an understanding of the atmospheric, geomorphological, and biotic processes that
shape the Earth’s surface environments.
C. Demonstrate an understanding of the global distribution of the world’s major climates,
ecosystems, and physiographic (landform) features.
D. Demonstrate an understanding of basic concepts of physical geography in the analysis of
real-world variations in environmental patterns.
E. Apply a working knowledge of the terminology of physical geography.
F. Demonstrate an understanding of the scientific method and practical experience using the tools
and concepts of physical geography.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The size, shape, and movements of the Earth in space and their importance
to environmental patterns and processes
2. The atmospheric, geomorphological, and biotic processes that shape the
Earth’s surface environments
3. The global distribution of the world’s major climates, ecosystems,
physiographic (landform) features
4. The basic tools of geographic inquiry
5. Basic concepts of physical geography in the analysis of real-world
variations in environmental patterns
Total Hours

Hours
11.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Periodical research
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. A 2,500 word written requirement will be integrated into the course through both homework
assignments and essay exams.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article (handed out in class) focusing on tectonic plate movement. Be prepared to
discuss how tectonic plate activity contributes to continental drift.
2. Read the chapter in your text dealing with the formation of landforms. Focus on erosion;
be prepared to discuss “erosion” as this active force contributes to shaping landforms.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a short essay (300 words) summarizing the “global warming” debate. Provide a
survey of research concerning global warming. Focus on actual research—not political
opinion. Pay close attention to paleo-climate data.
2. Write a 5 page research paper on prevailing weather systems associated with western
North America. In your paper, explain how these patterns are disrupted during El Nino
conditions.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend our field trip to Lassen National Park. Be prepared to take notes on various aspects
of volcanic activity. Pick a particular land form feature shaped by volcanic activity (e.g.
mud flow, cinder cone, and so forth) and be prepared to discuss you selection in class.
2. Attend our field trip to the Museum of Natural History in Chico. Describe their display on
the formation of the local northern California Cascade Range. Discuss your findings in
class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gabler, Robert E. Essentials of Physical Geography. 8th Edition. Thomson, 2007.
B. McKnight. Physical Geography. 9th Edition. Pearson, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/04/2013

