BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GEOL 34 - Historical Geology with Lab
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

4 Unit(s)

Historical geology with lab introduces students to Earth’s geologic history and the history of life on
Earth. Drawing on concepts from plate tectonics theory, evolution, geologic dating methods and
stratigraphy, students explore the planet’s origin and the processes that have repeatedly re-shaped the
global environment during the past 4.6 billion years. It also covers the history of life on this planet and
investigates the complementary roles played by natural selection and environmental change in shaping
both modern and ancient ecosystems. These concepts as well as fossil identification, study of
sedimentary rocks, and interpretation of geologic maps will be reinforced with an integrated laboratory
program. (C-ID GEOL 111).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain and practically apply the principles of the scientific method.
B. Demonstrate and practically apply a fundamental understanding of concepts and principles of
Historical Geology including: Fossilization, The fossil record, Ecology, evolution and
extinction, Plate tectonics, Geologic time and dating methods, and The Supercontinent Cycle
and paleoclimate
C. Identify and interpret representative fossil samples, rocks and minerals.
D. Explain and practically apply knowledge of tectonic processes to interpret geologic events
throughout geologic time.
E. Interpret geologic maps, cross sections and stratigraphic columns.
F. Practically apply the principles of relative dating to interpret sequences of geologic events.
G. Communicate complex course concepts effectively in writing and using diagrams.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Plate Tectonics
• Formation and Origin of the Earth
• Plate Boundaries
• Hot Spots
• Crustal Evolution and Deformation
• Supercontinent Cycle
2. Earth’s Materials
• Minerals
• Igneous, Sedimentary and Metamorphic Rocks
• Rock Cycle
3. Fossils

Hours
8.00

9.00

9.00

3. Fossils
• Modes of Formation
• Classification
• Ecology, Evolution and Extinction
4. Dating Methods
• Relative Dating
• Absolute Dating
• The Geologic Time Scale
5. Stratigraphy and Correlation
• Catastrophism and Uniformitarianism
• Interpretation of sedimentary rock sequences
6. Paleogeography
• Hadean - Formation and Origin of the Earth
• Archaean, Proterozoic and Ediacaran geologic and tectonic events
• Paleozoic geologic and tectonic events
• Mesozoic geologic and tectonic events
• Cenozoic geologic and tectonic events
• Recent geologic and tectonic events
Total Hours

9.00

8.00

8.00

9.00

51.00

Lab
Topics
1. Plate Tectonics and the Scientific Method
2. Basic introduction to identifying rocks and minerals
3. Sedimentary Rocks and Structures: Paleoenvironmental Interpretation
4. Stratigraphy and Correlation
5. Fossils and Fossilization
6. Geologic Dating Methods
7. Geologic Structures
8. Interpreting geologic maps
9. Interpreting geologic cross sections
10. Phylogenetics/Cladistics/Evolution
11. Recognizing Major Phyla
12. Fossils through Time
13. Paleogeography through Time
14. Field Trips
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Field Trips
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Problem-Solving Sessions

G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Laboratory Experiments
I. The 2500-word writing requirement will be met through a combination of written quizzes and
exams, the term project and written homework assignments.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Lab Projects
C. Written Assignments
D. Written examinations and quizzes
E. Term project
F. One final examination
G. Class participation and in-class written assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned chapter of Cordell Durrell’s Geologic History of the Feather River
Country, California and be prepared for an in-class discussion on the major rock units and
dating methods covered in the chapter. Be able locate these rock units on the 1:250,000
scale geologic map.
2. Read the chapter in your text on geologic time and complete the corresponding homework
assignment provided. Be prepared for an in class discussion on the following:
a. Relative dating methods.
b. Radioactive decay, the half life and parent-daughter atoms.
c. Uranium-lead and potassium-argon dating methods.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 3-5-page essay describing the extinction event at the end of the Cretaceous.
Evaluate the competing hypothesis regarding the specific cause or causes of this
extinction. Use in-class notes, your text and supplemental information available online
including PBS’s “What Killed the Dinosaurs.”
2. Write a 3-5-page essay describing the tectonic history of North America starting with the
break up of Pangea. Compare and contrast east coast and west coast geology during this
time. Carefully document the timing of significant events and cite all sources using MLA
criteria.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Take 5 local photographs that exhibit relative dating methods such as inclusions,
cross-cutting relationships and superposition. Write a 3-5 sentence informative,
geologically correct explanation on how the dating method works for each photo. You
must use your own photos (no photos from the internet or other students) and your project
should be presented on a small poster board.
2. Collect 2 rock samples from the Central Belt limestone blocks, the Tuscan formation or
the Chico formation. Write a brief (one page) description of each sample and describe the
depositional environment for each sample. Be sure to describe composition, sorting and
grain size and shape when justifying your interpretation. Use the fieldtrip guidebooks
available online to help you locate good collection sites.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Wicander and Monroe. Historical Geology. 7th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2012.
B. Poort and Carlson. Historical Geology: Interpretations and Applications. 7th Edition. Prentice
Hall, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Colin Ferguson
Date: 12/02/2013

