BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GERM 2 - Second Semester German
Prerequisite(s): GERM 1
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the second half of beginning German, which further develops language skills: reading,
writing, listening comprehension and speaking. In addition, this course continues to introduce students
to aspects of Germanic culture. Students who have completed at least two, but fewer than three years
of high school German (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present
date, should register for Third Semester German.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. improve the clarity of pronunciation in German
B. comprehend basic German
C. use both written and oral German for communication in everyday situations
D. formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition
E. appraise elements of Germanic culture
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in German-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Dative verbs
2. Two-way prepositions with the accusative and dative case
3. Word order - time before place
4. Separable-prefix verbs with the present and perfect tense
5. Dative prepositions
6. Relative clauses
7. Comparative and superlative of adjectives and adverbs
8. "Da-" and "wo-" compounds in statements and questions
9. A review of the perfect tense
10. Simple past of "haben" and "sein"
11. Attributive adjectives in the nominative, accusative, and dative cases
12. Future tense in contrast with present tense in form and function
13. Subordinating conjunctions and dependent clause word order
14. Narration of past events with appropriate tenses (simple past, perfect, and
past perfect)
15. Imperative mood

Hours
1.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
1.00
8.00
2.00
6.00
6.00
2.00

16. Passive voice
17. Subjunctive mood
18. Accusative and dative reflexive pronouns
19. Introduction to the genitive case
Total Hours

6.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in German except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a short letter from a German friend and compare important details with a classmate.
2. Read a short story in German three times. The first reading is for a basic understanding.
The second reading is to analyze and interpret grammar and vocabulary. The final reading
is to further strengthen comprehension.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Compose a text in German, expressing desires if they were to win the German lottery.
2. Write an email to a travel agency requesting additional information about cruises and tours
in Austria, Switzerland, and Germany.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Design a short skit, demonstrating accurate use of specific learned vocabulary and
grammar forms.
2. Watch a German televised weather forecast and report in the following class on the
details.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Tschirner, E., Nikolai, B., Terrel, T.. Kontakte: A Communicative Approach. 6th Edition.
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2009.
B. Zorach, C., Melin, C., Kautz, E.. English Grammar for Students of German. 5th Edition. Olivia
and Hill Press, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

