BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
GERM 3 - Third Semester German
Prerequisite(s): GERM 2
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the first half of intermediate German which further develops language skills: reading,
writing, listening comprehension and speaking. Through written analysis and discussion of both
modern and classical German texts, students further increase their fluency and grammatical accuracy
in the four skill areas. Students who have completed at least three, but fewer than four years of high
school German (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present date,
should register for Fourth Semester German.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. pronounce German accurately, with clarity and rhythm
B. comprehend both written and spoken German at the lower-intermediate level
C. use both written and oral German at the lower-intermediate level for communication in
everyday situations and some specialized topic areas, e.g. contemporary social issues and
German history
D. formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition
E. compare elements of Germanic culture to the United States
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in German-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Two-way prepositions, the imperative mood, ordinal numbers, and
compound nouns
2. Subjunctive with "würden", subordinating conjunctions, word order, and
article declension
3. Adjective endings, comparative/superlative adjectives and adverbs, and
demonstrative pronouns
4. Infinitives with and without "zu", simple past tense, and "da-" and "wo-"
compounds
5. Verbs with prepositions, the gentive case, and the future tense
6. Review of nouns: case endings form and function, weak nouns, and
adjectival nouns
7. Subjunctive mood versus indicative mood, past tense subjunctive, and
relative clauses and pronouns
8. Review of verbs: present, present perfect, simple past, future, imperative,

Hours
4.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
2.00

8. Review of verbs: present, present perfect, simple past, future, imperative,
present subjunctive, and past subjunctive
9. Written analysis of contemporary and classical German
literature
10. Oral analysis of contemporary and classical German
literature
Total Hours

2.00
10.00
30.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Collaborative Group Work
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in German except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an assigned excerpt of German literature in the target language, in preparation for a
class discussion. Read the text three times outside of class.
2. Scan a German newspaper for job postings. By identifying the qualifications and hiring
process, be prepared for a cross-cultural discussion about hiring practices in the USA and
Germany.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Edit and revise an essay written by apeer. Focus on clarity, grammatical accuracy, and the
revision process.
2. Write a summary of the main events in a piece of German literature.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch several German films and write a summary/critique in German.
2. Prepare outside of class an original skit based on a communicative context found in course
materials.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Teichert, H. & Teichert, L.. Allerlei zum Lesen. 2nd Edition. Houghton Mifflin Company, 2005.
B. Zorach, C.. English Grammar for Students of German. 5th Edition. Olivia & Hill , 2009.
C. Tschirner, E., Nikolai, B., Terrell, T.. Kontakte: A Communicative Approach. 6th Edition.
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

