BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 3 - World History to 1500
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of the development of world civilizations from prehistoric humans to 1500.
Major themes include: broad patterns of change; dynamics of race, class, gender and ethnicity;
reciprocal influence between the physical environment and human societies; and ways in which
human groups have interacted with one another. In addition, the course examines distinctive forms of
political, social, and economic organization, and significant scientific achievements, cultural
developments, and belief systems. The course also provides an introduction to historical method.
(C-ID HIST 150).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. make use of historical method to find and interpret primary and secondary sources, and compose
an argument which uses them, as appropriate, for support.
B. analyze broad patterns of change on both interregional scales and within complex societies.
C. examine civilization through multiple analytical categories such as race, class, gender and
ethnicity.
D. explain ways in which the world’s physical and natural environment has affected and been
affected by developments in human history.
E. analyze ways in which human groups have interacted with one another, including trade,
migration, warfare, cultural exchange and biological exchange, from early times to 1500 C.E.
F. compare distinctive forms of political, social and economic organization in the world and
explain their historical significance.
G. identify major discoveries, inventions and scientific achievements and explain their historical
significance.
H. explain the historical significance of cultural developments such as art, music, architecture,
literature and religion.
I. compare ideals, practices and historical developments of major belief systems.
J. analyze historical developments across national, regional and cultural boundaries.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Study of History
2. Historical Method
3. Prehistoric Humans and Their Migrations
4. Emergence of Agrarian Societies
5. Early Complex Societies 3500-500 B.C.E.
6. Formation of Classical Societies 500 B.C.E.–500 C.E.
7. Development of Major Belief Systems
8. The Post Classical Era 500-1000 C.E.

Hours
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00

8. The Post Classical Era 500-1000 C.E.
9. The Acceleration of Cross Cultural Interaction 1000–1500 C.E.
10. Development and Interrelations Between Major States and Empires
11. Relationship Between Humans and the Environment
Total Hours

6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture. It is expected that a major part of that time will be spent in the reading and
studying of monographs or articles, course readers, textbooks, literature, and/or primary source
documents.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
G. Exercises in historical method and with various types of historical evidence
H. This course has a 2500 word writing requirement. Methods of Evaluation must include essay
exams and written essays/research projects.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the primary and secondary source documents in Chapter 2, "The Urban Revolution
and Civilization." Did Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Mexico undergo the same development
and changes? Be prepared to address this question in class, and to reference the documents
in formulating your response.
2. Read Chapter Two, "First Farmers." As you read, take notes in response to the questions
in the chapter margins. You will submit your notes for credit, and the questions will be the
basis of an in-class quiz and discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Craft a well-developed research question on a topic in World History that fits within the
timeframe of this course. Recall that it's to be expected that your question will evolve and
mature during the research process. At the top of your paper, write the final version of
your question. In a formal paper between 1000-1250 words in length, summarize your
findings on your research question. The paper should be thoughtfully organized, with an
introduction, body, and conclusion, and logical and proper use of paragraphs. In your
essay, include specific and accurate information and examples from the sources that
reinforce the key observations presented. Details and facts in your essay must be cited
throughout, using proper format style.
You must also prepare an annotated bibliography that includes a minimum of three
sources. For each source, write a substantial paragraph in which you briefly describe the

source, how it is useful to your research, and why you consider it appropriate for use in
college work. Be sure that your annotated bibliography also adheres to proper format
style.
2. A theme that has emerged over the course of our studies is that of "the land conquering
the conqueror." In other words, when a civilization expands into a new area--by its armies,
merchants, religious, pathogens, culture, or technology--it not only brings change to the
people there, but changes itself. In essay form, identify and explain at least three specific
examples of this phenomena.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Pick a foreign country that will be the focus of your research over the course of the
semester. Identify a research problem or question with respect to the history of your
chosen country. Using Internet resources, newspaper archives, and published documents,
build an annotated primary source collection related to your research problem/question.
2. For this assignment, students will glimpse a foreign land or people through a cultural
artifact -- for example: art, music, food, a game, a foreign film, literature (including
comics), or clothing. As you view, read, or play, look for things that the artifact reveals
about the country, people, and time that it represents. Consider values, geography,
aesthetics, historical events, daily life, class, gender, and so forth. Conduct research to
find the answers to questions raised by the artifact, or to flesh out greater details about one
or more of your observations. You will turn in a written summary, and will share your
findings with the class through a brief demonstration or speech.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Strayer, R. and Nelson, E. Ways of the World: A Brief Global History, Volume I. Third Edition.
Bedford St. Martin's, 2016.
B. Bentley, J. and Ziegler, H. Traditions & Encounters: Volume 1 From the Beginning to 1500. 6th
Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2015.
C. Reilly, K. Worlds of History, Volume I: To 1550 A Comparative Reader. Fifth Edition.
Bedford/St. Martin's, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Christine Trolinger
Date: 04/18/2016

