BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 6 - Modern World History
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course surveys the origins and development of global trends from 1750 to the present. Themes
include the global impact of industrialization, imperialism, nationalism and totalitarianism, political
revolutions, conflict, and global economic and technological integration.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify and compare important political, economic, social, intellectual, and aesthetic
developments within the history of the world in the period from 1750 to the present.
B. examine the effects of the various stages of the Industrial Revolution and Industrial Agriculture
on environment, population growth, and social reform in various parts of the world.
C. analyze ways in which modern societies have experienced the phenomena of globalization,
world and regional conflict, population increase, environmental change, poverty, the rise and fall
of ideologies, and the Information Technology Revolution.
D. find, study, evaluate, and interpret primary and secondary sources, synthesize information, and
compose arguments grounded in knowledge of the past.
E. analyze the relevancy and use of history in contemporary society.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Study of History
2. Intellectual Change: The Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment
3. Political and Social Reform: Atlantic Revolutions, 1750-1830
A. The American Revolution
B. The French Revolution
C. The Haitian Revolution
D. The Napoleonic Empire
4. The Industrial Revolution and its Ecological, Ideological, and Social
Consequences
5. The West and the World: Imperialism in the Late 19th and Early 20th
Centuries
A. China, Japan, India, and Indochina
B. Africa
C. The Philippines, Hawaii, and the Panama Canal
6. Global Conflict: World War I

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00

6.00
6.00

3.00

6. Global Conflict: World War I
A. Specific Causes and Responsibility
B. American Involvement
C. Peace Settlement and the Restructuring of Europe
D. Effect on the non-Western World
7. Economic, Ideological, and Social Developments in the Interwar Period
A. The 1920's and the Great Depression
B. Rise of Fascism in Italy, Germany, and Japan
C. The Russian Revolution and the Soviet Union under Stalin
8. Global Conflict: World War II
A. Major Military Developments
B. American Involvement and the Development of Atomic Weapons
C. The Holocaust
D. Peace Settlements and the Postwar World
9. Global and Regional Conflict, Political Change, and Social Reform in the
Cold War Era
A. Nuclear Arms Race
B. Vietnam Conflict
C. The End of the Cold War: 1989 Revolutions in Eastern Europe and the
Break-up of the Soviet Union
10. The Middle East
A. Arab and Jewish Nationalism; the Arab-Israeli Conflict
B. The Great Powers and the Arab World
C. Oil and Politics
D. The Reassertion of Islamic Power
11. Economic, Political, and Social Change in Asia and Latin America in the
Postwar Years
A. China under Mao and after
B. Japan: the Economic Miracle
C. Democracy in India after 1947
D. Latin America since 1945
12. Patterns of Change in the World Today
A. Globalization
B. Population Increase
C. Climate Change
D. The Information Technology Revolution
Total Hours

3.00

3.00

3.00

6.00

6.00

6.00

3.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Homework: Students are expected to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture. A major part of that time will be spent reading both primary and secondary
sources, including but not limited to monographs, articles, course readers, textbooks, literature
and/or websites.

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
G. The course includes a 2500 word writing requirement. The writing requirement may be fulfilled
by any combination of essay or paragraph-length exam questions, formal essays or research
papers, and/or in-class or out-of-class writing activities.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Lin Zexu’s "Letter to Queen Victoria, 1839" and be prepared to discuss the
following questions: What language or phrases establish Lin’s understanding of the
relationship between China and Great Britain? According to Lin, what should motivate
Queen Victoria to halt the opium trade? How will she be rewarded? What does Lin say
about trade between China and the world? In his opinion, whom does this trade benefit?
2. Read the excerpt from Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich.
Be prepared to discuss the following questions: What motivations does Solzhenitsyn
ascribe to the inhabitants of the GULAG? Do they seem particularly criminal to you?
Why or why not? In what ways could this passage contradict the official Soviet image of
the U.S.S.R. as a “worker’s paradise?”
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read Documents 13-15, 16-18, and 48 in Susan Grayzel’s The First World War: A Brief
History with Documents. Write a 500-750 word essay addressing the following questions:
How did those serving in the military see one another across enemy lines? Were there
common experiences that transcended national differences? To what extend did national
experience prove unique? How did the presence of colonial troops affect the relationships
between men serving in the military?
2. Read the Treaty of Versailles (Document 43) in Susan Grayzel’s The First World War: A
Brief History with Documents. Write a 500-750 word essay addressing the following
questions: To what extent do the terms of the Treaty of Versailles reflect efforts to prevent
the First World War from occurring again? To what extent can they be seen as trying to
make sense of the war’s losses? To what extent are they efforts to shape a new global
order, including an imperial one?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Select any of the topics we have studied in this course. Conduct research on your topic
and then formulate a question, incorporating one of the following major historical themes:
causation, comparison/contrast, or change over time. Address your question in one of the
following ways: a) record a short 3-5 minute video presentation; b) create a 10-30 slide
PowerPoint; c) write a 600 to 1000 word essay. You must utilize information from two
primary sources and one secondary source. Document your sources using MLA or
Chicago Style (recommended for History majors).
2. Perform a quick online search for primary sources for a topic in Modern World History. In
a paragraph, summarize your experience providing examples of the results. Next, read the
CSU Long Beach webpage "How to Find Primary Documents from the Internet." Use
some of the suggested Google techniques (including the advanced techniques) to search
for primary sources on the same topic. In a paragraph, describe how your experience
differed, again providing examples of the results.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. McKay, J. Understanding World Societies, Volume 2 Since 1450. Second Edition. Bedford St.
Martin's, 2015.
B. Grayzel, S. The First World War: A Brief History with Documents. First Edition. Bedford St.
Martin's, 2013.
C. Solzhenitsyn, A., . One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich. 1st Edition. Bantum, 1984.

Created/Revised by: Christine Trolinger
Date: 05/02/2016

