BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 8 - United States History to 1877
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

A survey of the history of the United States, from pre-colonial North America to the end of
Reconstruction, that addresses important political, economic, social, and cultural developments.
Themes may include but are not limited to aspects of class, race, and gender; systems of labor;
intellectual, technological, social, and cultural history; the role of geography; and foreign relations.
The course also introduces students to the historical reasoning skills necessary to form their own
understanding of the past, and of contemporary society. (C-ID HIST 130).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify important political, economic, technological, social, and cultural developments in the
American past.
B. explain historical events and developments in chronological and contextual relation to one
another.
C. recognize the diversity of historical experiences, and the contributions of major social and
ethnic groups.
D. find, study, evaluate, and interpret primary and secondary sources, synthesize information, and
compose arguments grounded in knowledge of the past.
E. employ his/her knowledge of the past and ability to analyze information to develop a critical
consciousness of self, society, and the world.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Study of History
2. Native Cultures
3. Three Worlds Meet: Europe, Africa, America
4. Colonial North America
a. The Spanish Borderlands
b. The Chesapeake Colonies
c. The New England Colonies
d. The Middle Colonies
5. Revolutionary America
a. The Causes of the American Revolution
b. The Declaration of Independence
c. The War for Independence
6. Forming a New Nation

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00

6.00

6.00

6.

Forming a New Nation
a. The Articles of Confederation
b. The Constitution
7. The Market Revolution and Early American Society
8. Westward Expansion and Manifest Destiny
9. The History and Politics of Slavery
10. Secession and The Civil War
11. Reconstruction
Total Hours

6.00

6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Homework: Students are expected to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture. A major part of that time will be spent reading both primary and secondary
sources, including but not limited to monographs, articles, course readers, textbooks, literature
and/or websites.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
G. The course includes a 2500 word writing requirement. The writing requirement may be fulfilled
by any combination of essay or paragraph-length exam questions, formal essays or research
papers, and/or in-class or out-of-class writing activities.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the essay, "Why Study History," by Peter Stearns. Rank the six reasons that he
provides, with the reason you find most convincing first and descending to the reason you
find least compelling. Arrive in class prepared to discuss the reading and your thoughts.
2. Read the Prologue to our book, A Voyage Long and Strange. Arrive in class ready to
discuss author Tony Horwitz's thoughts on why sixteenth century North America is
largely overlooked in history textbooks and classrooms, and his approach to writing this
book.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Compose a 500-750 word essay in response to the question: Should John Brown's raid at
Harpers Ferry be considered the act of a freedom fighter determined to liberate slaves? Or
was the raid the act of a terrorist aiming to spread panic throughout the South? The essay
should include specific references to primary sources. It should also reflect accurate
knowledge of John Brown and the issues/circumstances surrounding the raid.
2. Using the UC Berkeley Library webpage "Evaluating Web Pages" as a guide, compose a
one page critique of a website focused on a topic in United States History. Include specific

examples from the website throughout your critique.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch the first five minutes of the YouTube video, "How to Create a Concept Map."
Continue watching to learn how to make concept maps using paper, MSWord, or Google
Drive. Create a concept map for this main concept: "Spanish Exploration and Colonization
in North America, 1492-1821." Using the model suggested in the video, build your map
using at least twenty words that are related to the concept.
2. Perform an online search for primary sources for a topic in United States History. In a
paragraph, summarize your experience providing examples of the results. Next, read the
CSU Long Beach webpage "How to Find Primary Documents from the Internet." Use
some of the suggested Google techniques (including the advanced techniques) to search
for primary sources on the same topic. In a paragraph, describe how your experience
differed, again providing examples of the results.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Foner, E. Give Me Liberty!: An American History (Volume 1). 4th Edition. W. W. Norton &
Company, 2013.
B. Douglass, F. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. 2013 Edition.
Simon & Brown, 2013.
C. Horwitz, T. Midnight Rising: John Brown and the Raid that Sparked the Civil War. 1st Edition.
Picador, 2012.
D. Butler, O.E. Kindred. 1st Edition. Beacon Press, 2003.

Created/Revised by: Christine Trolinger
Date: 04/18/2016

