BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 26 - Roles of Men and Women in American History
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of the roles of men and women in the American past from the pre-colonial era
to the present. The course examines the ways that ideas about masculinity and femininity have shaped
men and women's participation in major political, economic, social, and cultural events and
developments, and why ideas of manhood and womanhood change.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify how ideas about masculinity and femininity have shaped the historical experiences of
men and women and their participation in important political, economic, social, and cultural
events and developments.
B. describe the complex interplay between biology, economic systems, political culture, race and
ethnicity, religion, mass media, region, and personal choice and the varied roles of men and
women in the American past.
C. find, study, evaluate, and interpret primary and/or secondary source materials, and from them
formulate logical and informed statements about the past.
D. employ his/her knowledge of the past and ability to analyze information to develop a critical
consciousness of self, society, and the world.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction

Hours
3.00

A. The Idea of Gender
B. Gender and History
2. Pre-Colonial America, Europe, and Africa

3.00

A. Men and Women's Roles among the Native Peoples of the Eastern
Woodlands and the Southwest
B. Status of Men and Women in Early Modern Europe and West Africa
3. Gender Roles in Colonial America: Native American, European, and
African Men and Women
A. Spanish Colonial America
B. The Chesapeake Colonies
C. The New England Colonies
D. The Middle Coloines

6.00

4. Revolutionary America and the Constitution: The Republican Man and
Republican Motherhood
5. Northern Men and Women in the Early National Period

3.00
3.00

A. Middle Class Separate Spheres
B. Wage-Earning Men and Women
C. Reform Movements
6. Southern Men and Women in the Early National Period

3.00

A. Planters, Yeomen, and Slave Men
B. Plantation Mistresses, Yeomen Women, and Slave Women
7. The Civil War and Reconstruction: Masculinity, Femininity, and
Citizenship Redefined
8. Men and Women in the Nineteenth Century Trans-Mississippi West

3.00
3.00

A. Native American Men and Women in the Far West
B. Latino Men and Women in the Southwest
C. European American Men and Women on the Overland Trail and
Frontier
9. The Era of Industrialization

3.00

A. Immigrant Men, Women, and Work
B. Men and Women in the Labor Movement
C. Men and Women in Gilded Age and Progressive Era Reform
10. The New Man and the New Woman at the Turn of the Twentieth Century
11. Men and Women in the Great Depression and World War II
12. Men and Women in Cold War America
13. Sixties Protest and New Definitions of Manliness
14. Second Wave Feminism
15. The Gay and Lesbian Movement
16. Men, Women, and Family Today
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Field Trips
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
J. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture. It is expected that a major part of that time will be spent in the reading and

studying of monographs or articles, course readers, textbooks, literature, and/or primary source
documents.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Journal
G. Class participation
H. Written Assignments
I. Essays and research papers
J. Class Discussion
K. The course includes a 2500 word writing requirement. The writing requirement may be fulfilled
by any combination of essay or paragraph-length exam questions, formal essays or research
papers, and/or in-class or out-of-class writing activities.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Ritter, Gretchen. The Constitution As Social Design: Gender And Civic Membership in the
American Constitutional Order. 1st Edition. Stanford University Press, 2006.
B. Hoffert, Sylvia. A History of Gender in America: Essays, Documents, and Articles. 1st Edition.
Prentice Hall, 2003.
C. Jacobs, Harriet. Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl. Unabridged Edition. Prestwick House, Inc.,
2006.
D. Gorn, Elliot J.. The Manly Art: Bare-Knuckle Prize Fighting in America. Cornell University
Press, 1989.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Primary Source Materials: Collected volumes, instructor packets, or online readings.
B. Note: This is a list of representative texts and materials. They are not the books or materials that
an instructor must use.

Created/Revised by: Christine Trolinger
Date: 10/05/2009

