BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 30 - History of the African American
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the conditions of African Americans in the United States as shaped and
influenced by the African tradition, and provides a broad and basic understanding of African
Americans in U.S. history. African American contributions to American culture, economy, and politics
will be assessed.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the importance of the African tradition as it relates to the African American
experience.
B. Explain the principle elements of the struggle for the civil and legal equality of African
Americans for each of the major eras of American history--the American Revolution, the Civil
War/Reconstruction, the World Wars, the Civil Rights Era.
C. Describe the contributions of individual African Americans to the growth and the development
of American society.
D. Describe the impact of the United States Constitution and various Supreme Court decisions on
African Americans and the nation.
E. Locate, evaluate, and interpret primary and/or secondary source materials, and then formulate
logical and informed conclusions about the past.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Historiography/Methodology and the Relevance of Studying African
American History
2. The African Tradition and Way of Life
3. The African Slave Trade and the New World
4. Colonial Slavery
5. The American Revolution and the U.S. Constitution
6. Westward Expansion/Manifest Destiny
7. Abolition and Intersectional Strife
8. Civil War and the African American
9. Emancipation and Radical Reconstruction
10. Segregation and the Jim Crow Era
11. World War I
12. The Harlem Renaissance
13. The Great Depression and The New Deal

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

14. World War II
15. African Americans in the Cold War Era
16. The Civil Rights Era
17. Modern Black America
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Field Trips
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Demonstrations
I. Reading Assignments
J. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Journal
F. Written Assignments
G. Essays and research papers
H. Each student is required to write at least 2,500 words for credit in the course. The writing will
be evaluated on content and syntax.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1.
1. Students are expected to read college level materials. Readings may include a
course text, periodicals, handouts, literature, historical documents, and/or websites
that require individual comprehension at both a factual and interpretive level.
2. Read Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl. Arrive in class ready to turn in notes from
your reading, and to discuss the following questions:
Describe 19th century expectations of morality, virtue, and behavior for
women. What dilemmas did Jacobs face within this context? What was her
response or solution? What actions did she take?
What is your reaction to Jacobs? Was she a moral and virtuous woman? Can
we criticize her "sin." Was she a victim? Or, is she an example of courage,
strength, and independence?

B. Writing Assignments
1.
1. Write an essay in which you analyze the impact of the Second World War on
African American men and women. Your essay should have an introduction, a body
that includes at least 3 detailed and well-explained examples, and a conclusion. The
essay will be graded on accuracy, insight, and completeness. Paragraph structure,
sentence structure, grammar, spelling, and punctuation all matter and will be
included in the grade determination.
2. In a short paragraph, identify and describe the main idea presented in the video
segment. Include details describing the conditions surrounding the creation of the
14th Amendment and why it was necessary.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1.
1. Prepare a mini-lecture and handout on your assigned term/topic. Prepare to speak
for 6-7 minutes. The handout must include:
an image
basic facts (who, what, when, where, why, how)
historical significance
what you found most interesting
source reference.

2. Website Critique
Study the assigned tutorial for evaluating websites.
Find a website that explores a specific topic in African American History.
Evaluate the website based on the 5 steps of the tutorial.
Write a critique of the website that follows the 5 steps in the tutorial.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Franklin, John Hope. From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans. Ninth Edition.
McGraw Hill, 2009.
B. Bennett, Lerone . Before the Mayflower. Millennium Edition. Johnson Publishing Co., Inc.,
2003.
C. Hine, Darlene Clark. The African American Odyssey. Fourth Edition. Printice Hall, 2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:

A. Supplemental resources (films, primary & secondary sources, internet references, etc.) as
deemed appropriate by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: John Martin
Date: 12/06/2010

