BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 18 - Multicultural History of the United States
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

A survey of the history of the United States from pre-colonial times to the present with particular
emphasis on the multicultural heritage shared by all citizens. Contributions of African, Asian,
European, Latino, and native American will be examined. Historical experiences of all groups will be
compared and studies in relation to the general history of the United States, the dynamics of
majority-minority interaction, immigration policy, and constitutional law.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate knowledge of terms, specific facts, trends and sequences, methods of historical
inquiry, principles and generalizations, and theories and structures of history
B. Demonstrate ability to observe, classify, translate, interpret, extrapolate, apply analyze,
synthesize, and evaluate oral, written, and pictorial data and evidence.
C. Demonstrate ability to formulate opinions informed by new evidence.
D. Demonstrate proficiency in written communication.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. General Goals
1. Knowledge of an appreciation for the development of the United States as a nation created
by diverse racial and ethnic groups.
2. Specific historical understanding of five major racial/ethnic groups in the United States,
African, Asian, European, Latino and Native Peoples.
3. Awareness of the interaction between the dominant culture and various minority groups,
including how this was determined the various national legislative, executive, and judicial
decisions.
4. A Historical perspective on national immigration policy and law.
5. A more detailed knowledge based centering on the issues and challenges facing the
United States in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
6. The ability to become independent decision makers concerning multicultural issues in the
twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
B. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Native Americans Before the Conquest

Hours
4.00

a. Pre-Columbian settlements in North America
2. European Americans

4.00

2. European Americans

4.00

a. European Background
b. Comparing Spanish, French, and English colonies
3. African Americans

4.00

a. West African origins
b. Spanish and English systems of slavery in the Americas
4. Early national period: The Constitution and the Bill of Rights

4.00

a. European Americans: the Germans and the Irish
b. Native American removal to the "West"
c. Slavery and its discontents
5. Mexican Americans

4.00

a. Early Settlements in California and the Southwest
b. "Manifest Destiny" and emigrants from the Unites States to Mexico
c. Texas Annexation and the Mexican War
d. Mexican-American experiences after the war
6. Asian Americans

4.00

a. Chinese immigrants to the "Gold Mountain"
b. Japanese immigrants to Hawaii

7. Civil War and Reconstruction
8. Industrialization and Expansion in the 19th and 20th Centuries

4.00
6.00

a. Indian wars and the bureau of Indian Affairs: From Reservation to
Reorganization
b. Ellis Island/Angele Island experiences
c. African American migration north
d. Hawaiian annexation
e. Latino immigration north

9. Economic and military influences on immigration and migration

3.00

a. The Great Depression and repatriation
b. World War II and Japanese internment
c. The legacy of the Vietnam War: new immigrants from Southeast
Asia
10. Immigration Policy and Law Since the 19th Century

4.00

a. Exclusion vs. the "melting pot"
b. National quota systems
c. Current immigration policy
11. Twentieth Century Struggles toward Pluralism: A Constitution for All
Americans

10.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. For Classroom Instruction
1. Lecture
2. Primary source documents/pictorial evidence
3. Directed discussion
4. Textual readings/other secondary source readings
5. Independent investigation
6. Slides/films
7. Research paper
8. Journal/study guide
9. Case studies and small group analyses of various analysis of various policies, legislation, and
legal decisions
10. Homework: Students will be required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework
for each hour of lecture
B. For Online Instruction
1. Lecture - via video/audio streaming, html documents, or PowerPoint presentations.
2. Primary source documents, pictorial, audio, or video evidence - via supplemental readers or
various websites.
3. Independent investigations.
4. Research paper.
5. Collaborative projects or discussions using online discussion boards, email, or chat.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Examination (must measure ability to critically evaluate content with at least 20% essay).
C. Portfolio or journal: students will be expected to write their opinions on various historical
issues/controversies on a weekly basis.
D. Written assignments (Each student will be required to write at least 2500 words for credit in the
course. This work will be evaluated on content and syntax.).
E. Homework: Students will be expected to complete two hours of out-of-class homework for each
hour of instruction.
F. At the discretion of the instructor. A suggested evaluation procedure is:
a. Exams consisting of objective portion and essay
b. Written assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Suggested required texts: 1. Schlesinger, Arthur. The Disuniting of America (1992) 2. Takaki,
Ron. A Different Mirror. (1993) 3. Olson, James. The Ethnic Dimension in American History
(1994)
B. Possible optional texts: 1. Steiner, Dale. Of Thee We Sing. 2. Shakespeare. The Tempest.
C. Two of the following might be selected by each student (may be added to or deleted by the
instructor): 1. Silko, Leslie. Ceremony. 2. Carter, Forrest. The Education of Little Tree. 3.
Haley, Alex. Roots. 4. Haley, Alex & Malcolm X. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. 5. Maya

Angelou. I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. 6. Hurston, Zora Neale. Their Eyes Were
Watching God. 7. Tan, Amy. The Joy Luck Club. 8. Jen, Gish. Typical American. 9. Bao Lord,
Bette. Spring moon: A Novel of China. 10. Hijuelos, Oscar. The mambo Kings Play Songs of
Love. 11. Garza, Rodolfo. Barrio Boy. 12. Villarreal, jose Antonio. Pocho. 13. Wakatsuki,
Houston. Farewell to Manzanar. 14. Mathaliane. Kaffir Boy in America. 15. Fuentes, Carlos.
The Death of Artenio Cruz.
D. Supplemental primary source material will be distributed frequently.
E. Library Reference Materials 1. Ethnic Newswatch (CD Rom) 2. ProQuest (CD Rom) 3.
Academic Index (CD Rom)

Created/Revised by: Ty Benoit
Date: 03/06/2006

