BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 20 - Political History of the Middle East
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

An introduction to the cultural and historical background of the Middle East. An inquiry into
government, family, social classes, religion, politics, and regional conflict in the Middle East both past
and present.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. examine and describe Middle Eastern peoples and cultures with respect to political, social, and
economic patterns.
B. analyze and explain the complex interplay between industrialized nations' need for oil, Arab
nationalism, and the creation of Israel.
C. recognize the complexities of the past, including the varieties of historical experiences and the
importance of perspective in the study of history.
D. assess primary and/or secondary sources, and from them formulate logical and informed
statements about the past.
E. employ his/her knowledge of the past to develop a critical consciousness of self, society, and the
world. Demonstrate a readiness to change opinion and behavior in the face of new information
as he/she searches for historical knowledge and understanding.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction

Hours
3.00

a. Methods of Historical Inquiry
b. Descriptive Geography of the Middle East
2. The Abrahamic Faiths: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam

6.00

a. Ancient Jewish History
b. Christians and Rome
c. Rise of Islam
3. The Historical Experience of Jews in Christendom and as Dhimmis

6.00

a. Second Class Status
b. European Anti-semitism
c. Russian Pogroms
4. Nationalism and Imperialism

6.00

4. Nationalism and Imperialism

6.00

a. Ottoman Weakness
b. The Eastern Question
c. Westernizing Reform
5. The Rise of Arab Nationalism and Zionism

6.00

a. Pan-Arabism
b. Individual States
c. Political and Religious Zionism
6. World War I and Modern Conflict

9.00

a. British Promises
b. League of Nations Treaties
c. Mandate System
7. Israel's Rebirth, Arab Reaction, and the New Historians

6.00

a. War for Independence
b. The Arab Countries
c. Israel's Early Years
8. The Contemporary Middle East

9.00

a. The Arab-Israeli Conflict
b. The Great Powers and the Arab World
c. Oil and Politics
d. The Reassertion of Islamic Power
Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Field Trips
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
J. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture. It is expected that a major part of that time will be spent in the reading and
studying of monographs or articles, course readers, textbooks, literature, and/or primary source
documents.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests

B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Demonstration
F. Journal
G. Group Participation
H. Class participation
I. Written Assignments
J. Essays and research papers
K. Class Discussion
L. The course includes a 2500 word writing requirement. The writing requirement may be fulfilled
by any combination of essay or paragraph-length exam questions, formal essays or research
papers, and/or in-class or out-of-class writing activities.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lamb, David. The Arabs. Revised Edition. Vintage, 2002.
B. Wiesel, Elie. Night. Revised Edition. Hill and Wang, 2006.
C. Pappe, Ilan. The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine. Oneworld Publications, 2007.
D. Catherwood, Christopher. A Brief History of the Middle East: From Abraham to Arafat.
Running Press, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Primary Source Documents: Collected volumes, instructor packets, or online readings.

Created/Revised by: Christine Trolinger
Date: 09/28/2009

