BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HIST 10 - United States History-1877 to Present
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

A survey of the history of the United States, from the end of Reconstruction to the Present, that
addresses important political, economic, social, and cultural developments. Themes may include but
are not limited to aspects of class, race, and gender; systems of labor; intellectual, technological,
social, and cultural history; the role of geography; and foreign relations. The course also introduces
students to the historical reasoning skills necessary to form their own understanding of the past, and of
contemporary society. (C-ID HIST 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify important political, economic, technological, social, and cultural developments in the
American past.
B. explain historical events and developments in chronological and contextual relation to one
another.
C. recognize the diversity of historical experiences, and the contributions of major social and
ethnic groups.
D. find, study, evaluate, and interpret primary and secondary sources, synthesize information, and
compose arguments grounded in knowledge of the past.
E. employ his/her knowledge of the past and ability to analyze information to develop a critical
consciousness of self, society, and the world.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Study of History
2. Reconstruction
3. Continental and Commercial Expansion
A. The Trans-Mississippi West
B. The Rise of Industry
C. Immigration
D. The New Urban America
E. Imperialism
4. Reform
A. Populism
B. Progressivism
5. The First World War and Its Aftermath
6. The Twenties
7. The Great Depression and the New Deal

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00

3.00

3.00
3.00
6.00

8. The Second World War
9. Cold War America
10. The Civil Rights Era
11. The Vietnam War: At Home and Abroad
12. The Conservative Ascendancy
13. The U. S. in a Global Era
Total Hours

3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Homework: Students are expected to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture. A major part of that time will be spent reading both primary and secondary
sources, including but not limited to monographs, articles, course readers, textbooks, literature
and/or websites.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
G. This course has a 2500 word writing requirement. Methods of Evaluation must include essay
exams and written essays/research projects.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. From Profiles in Leadership, read the essay "Chief Joseph and the Challenge of Indian
Leadership." Arrive in class ready to identify the author's thesis, and to provide examples
of how he supports his thesis.
2. Read Chapter 5 in Going to the Source. As you read, make a list of both the advantages
and disadvantages of using advertisements as evidence of the past. Arrive in class ready to
hand in your list, and to participate in an activity analyzing historical advertisements.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay in which you explore some of the major themes of Progressivism. Begin by
identifying the term, Progressive Era (who, what, where, when, why, how). Then,
describe three important themes of the movement, using specific examples to illustrate
and explain each theme. Finally, conclude with commentary on the historical significance
of the era.
2. Throughout our reading of The Murder of the Century, we have identified and discussed
several themes in the history of Gilded Age America (e.g. the new urban America, yellow
journalism, criminal investigation, city government, the use of primary sources). Write an
essay in which you summarize your new knowledge and understanding of one of the
themes. Include and explain at least three specific examples from the book that have
shaped your thinking.

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Pick any topic in United States History Since 1877. Using whatever method that you
normally use, spend a few minutes looking for primary sources on the Internet for your
topic. In a paragraph, summarize your experience. (What was your process? Were you
able to find any primary sources? If yes, was it fairly easy, or was it difficult? If you did
not find any primary sources, what kinds of results did you get from your search?)
Next, follow the link provided by the instructor to the webpage "How To Find Primary
Sources From the Internet." Using some of the suggested techniques, try your search
again. In a paragraph, describe the results. (Were they improved? How so? If not, why
might that be?)
2. Follow the link, provided by the instructor, to a useful tutorial on evaluating websites.
Read through and study the entire tutorial. Next, find a website on any topic relevant to
United States History Since 1877. Write a critique of your website that is organized
around the five steps used in the Berkeley tutorial.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Foner, E. Give Me Liberty!: An American History (Volume 2). 4th Edition. W. W. Norton &
Company, 2013.
B. Isaacson, W. Profiles in Leadership: Historians on the Elusive Quality of Greatness. W. W.
Norton & Company, 2011.
C. Brown, V.B. & Shannon, T.J. Going to the Source: The Bedford Reader in American History
(Volume II: Since 1865). Fourth Edition. Bedford St. Martin's, 2016.
D. Collins, P. The Murder of the Century: The Gilded Age Crime That Scandalized a City &
Sparked the Tabloid Wars. Broadway Books, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Christine Trolinger
Date: 04/18/2016

