BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HLTH 20 - Current Health Issues in Athletics
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course covers current health issues faced by athletes. Emphasis is on the psychological, social,
and developmental effects of a variety of health issues as they relate to the world of sport. Topics will
include eating disorders, drug use, tobacco use, alcohol use and illnesses that can affect an athlete's
performance. Students will learn about outside influences and decision making regarding health issues
in athletics specific to age, gender, sexuality, and sport demands.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. describe signs and symptoms of specific health issues and identify characteristics of specific
groups that are at risk for these health issues.
B. define the psychological, social, and developmental effects of specific health issues as they
relate to an athlete's personal, social, intellectual, and physical development.
C. identify and describe decision making steps to overcome outside influences socially and
athletically.
D. identify the on-campus and local resources that provide treatment and prevention programs.
E. assess the risks involved with performance enhancing practices used in the world of sport.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation and Introduction
2. Family Illness (Chemical Abuse)
3. Athletic Specific Illnesses
4. Eating Disorders
5. Substance Abuse and Dependency
6. Tobacco Use
7. Alcohol Use
8. Performance Enhancing Drugs
9. Social Drug Use
10. Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Date Rape
11. Advertising - Identifying the Target Groups
12. Steps to Decision Making: Peer Pressure and Social Settings
13. Treatment and Prevention Programs
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.00
1.50
2.00
2.00
1.00
0.50
1.00
0.50
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read three articles that address the risks involved with performance enhancing drugs used
by athletes. Choose one specific risk to describe in class.
2. Research the signs and symptoms of eating disorders in athletes and steps to take for
prevention and treatment. Be prepared to discuss in small groups.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page paper describing various reasons for substance use and abuse. Be
prepared to discuss your findings in small groups.
2. In a three page essay explain the characteristics of an athlete who may be susceptible to
heat illness. Be sure to address future prevention plans for these athletes.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Develop an individual nutrition plan that is food based as opposed to supplement based.
From your plan, choose one key element of nutrition and its benefits to present to the
class.
2. Research at least five local resources (two can be on campus) that deal with treatment and
prevention of substance abuse. Choose one to visit in person and plan to share your
information in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Mottram, D.R. Drugs in Sport. 5th Edition. Routledge, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 04/29/2013

