BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HLTH 10 - Leisure for Healthy Living
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the role of leisure as a key component of mental, emotional, and physical
well-being. Students will learn constructive uses of leisure time while developing personal and healthy
values. Emphasis will include personal growth, social impacts, leisure planning, stress management,
and health enhancement.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify the basic terms and values associated with leisure.
B. compare and contrast theories and concepts of leisure to overall health.
C. explain time management and leisure planning principles and how they are applied to improving
lifestyles.
D. recognize how leisure behavior can affect physical and mental well-being.
E. analyze the impact of stress and how stress can be reduced through leisure activities.
F. explain the social significance of leisure including its interaction with history, contemporary
society, technology and the environment.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Dimensions of Leisure
2. Importance of Leisure to Individuals and Society
3. Leisure and Quality of Life
4. Historical Perspective of Leisure
5. Physical Activity Trends
6. Leisure and Well-Being
7. Outdoor Leisure and Park Systems
8. Professional Opportunities
9. Volunteer Leisure Activities
10. Leisure for Special Populations
11. Economics of Leisure
12. Technology Impacts
13. Recreation and Social Development
14. Leisure and Stress Management
15. Leisure and the Future
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
3.00
5.00
3.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review and identify professional job opportunities that are associated with leisure
activities. These may include park rangers, outdoor administration, event coordinators,
resort personnel, etc. Be prepared to discuss in small groups.
2. Read an article on stress problems in society and perform a short write documenting how
leisure activities can benefit in decreasing the effects of stress. Be prepared to discuss in
class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 1-page essay on a leisure activity that is important to you. Describe the positive
and/or negative health impacts associated with the leisure activity.
2. Review a specific park system (national, state, or local) documenting the historical and
leisure benefits for the chosen system. Report findings in a 2-page essay and be prepared
to present to the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Design a leisure trip of your choice for you and three friends. Your planning should
include an itinerary of events, budgetary issues, and specific leisure activities. Provide a
brief summary of your goals and expected outcomes as it pertains to overall health. Be
creative!
2. Research the history, rules, and styles of a leisure activity of your choice. This activity can
be either mental or physical, but must be approved by the instructor. Be prepared to
demonstrate and teach your chosen leisure activity.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Human Kinetics. Dimensions of Leisure for Life: Individuals and Society. 1st Edition. Human
Kinetics, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Materials will vary depending upon the activity requirements.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 12/10/2012

