BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HLTH 2 - Health and Wellness
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides basic knowledge and understanding of health and wellness issues in today's
society and provides the information needed to make behavioral changes, which will assist students in
developing a healthy and successful college experience. Students will explore the concepts of health
and wellness behaviors including: psychological/emotional, spiritual, physical, intellectual,
environmental, and social wellness. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. utilize college resources on campus and in the community to enhance personal and academic
needs relating to health and wellness.
B. assess choices based on having an understanding of higher education, including degrees,
certificates, and career and transfer pathways.
C. perform self-assessment and reflection to describe the dimensions of wellness and how each
influences the development of a healthy lifestyle.
D. identify the major health problems in the United States today.
E. recognize the influence of personal choice on one's stress, alcohol and drug use, sexual
behaviors, tobacco use, time management, finances and the environment.
F. explain how to develop and maintain healthy relationships, including basic communications
skills.
G. identify the structure and function of the male and female sex organs as they pertain to
conception, childbirth and contraception.
H. summarize the guidelines that have been developed to help people choose a healthy diet, avoid
nutritional deficiencies, and reduce their risk of diet-related chronic diseases.
I. explain the wellness benefits of physical activity and exercise and how exercise contributes to
weight management.
J. describe the controllable and uncontrollable risk factors associated with common illness and
health care prevention.
K. summarize the basic premises, practices, and providers of conventional, complimentary, and
alternative medicine.
L. create a goal setting pathway through implementation of behavioral modification and change
that identify learning styles, educational/career planning, and lifestyle choices.
M. identify their own learning style and implement strategies to ensure a healthy college experience.

III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Setting Goals for Good Health and Wellness (Dimensions)
2. Developing a Healthy and Strategic Approach to Learning and Academic

Hours
3.00
3.00

2. Developing a Healthy and Strategic Approach to Learning and Academic
Planning
3. Stress, Time and Financial Management
4. Psychological Health
5. Intimate Relationships and Communication
6. Sexuality, Pregnancy and Childbirth
7. Contraceptions and Abortion
8. Drug, Alcohol, and Tobacco Use and Abuse
9. Nutrition and Weight Management
10. Exercise and Fitness
11. Cardiovascular Disease and Cancer
12. Immunity and Infection
13. Aging/Death and Dying
14. Conventional and Complimentary Medicine
15. Personal Safety/Unintentional Injuries and Violence
16. Environmental Health
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
2.00
6.00
5.00
3.00
5.00
3.00
1.50
1.50
3.00
1.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Journal
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
F. Written or Oral Examinations
G. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Students will be expected to read materials as assigned by the instructor. Reading
materials will include, but are not limited to: textbook, professional journals and handouts.
2. Review and evaluate information specific to various mental disorders that college students
may face during their college career.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Maintain a semester long journal noting behavioral changes specific to diet, social life and
college strategies and success.
2. Perform a series of short writes based on the current topics being discussed in class.

C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Perform a stress test at an outside agency and present all findings to the class.
2. Develop and distribute a drug/ alcohol use and abuse survey to college age students,
friends and random students.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Sparling, Phillip B., Redican, Kerry J. iHealth: An Interactive Framework. 1st Edition.
McGraw-Hill, 2011.
B. Insel, Paul M., Roth, Walton T. Core Concepts in Health, Brief. 12th Edition. McGraw-Hill,
2012.

Created/Revised by: Frances Babich
Date: 05/02/2011

