BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HON 11 - Honors Capstone
1 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2 and admission to Honors Program and completion of 18
Honors units or completion of 15 Honors units and concurrent enrollment in 3 Honors
units in addition to Honors 11
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture
This course provides Honors students who have already completed a minimum of 18 units in Honors
classes (or have completed 15 units in Honors classes and are concurrently enrolled in 3 Honors units
in addition to Honors Capstone), the opportunity to carry out a supervised individual research or
creative project in Honors to synthesize, apply, and further develop the skills and knowledge they
have acquired in the Honors Program. Students interested in registering for Honors 11 must get
pre-approval from an Honors instructor prior to the semester they intend to register for. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Synthesize and apply a range of knowledge and advanced learning and research skills gained in
the Honors Program in a significant project.
B. Utilize advanced skills in writing, critical thinking, and creative thinking in a Capstone project.
C. Conceptualize, propose, organize, and produce an ambitious, challenging self-generated
project—either an accomplished piece of writing or a work or body of work in another creative
medium.
D. Generate creative, original responses to course material.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Instructor and student meet to determine scope, objectives, and form of
Capstone project.
2. Reading and research.
3. Instructor and student meet during the semester to evaluate progress and
make changes and refinements in approach if necessary.
4. Writing/construction of final project.
5. Instructor and student meet for oral evaluation of Capstone project.
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
7.00
1.00
7.00
1.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Reading Assignments
D. Consultation between instructor and student
E. Group Work

F. Out-of-class research
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Portfolios
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Readings
G. Lab Projects
H. Written Assignments
I. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review an instructor-generated handout on pound formula.
2. Research a current topic in stem-cell biology and biotechnology.
3. Read both historical and current sources on a historic figure of great significance.
4. Research speaking opportunities outside of class on a subject of importance to the student
or his/her community.
5. Read sources including publicly accessible government documents, historic newspaper
accounts, and other primary sources providing background to a current incident or event.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an accomplished, extended piece of fiction or a group of poems dealing with the
themes and subjects of the student's Capstone project.
2. Write a comprehensive outline for a speech.
3. Write an essay on the significance of the pound formula conversion and how the formula
can be verified using the dimensional analysis.
4. Write a 1,500-5,000–word essay on the evolving popular perception of a controversial
historic figure or event (e.g., Cleopatra, Galileo, Mickey Mantle, the sinking of the
Lusitania), explicating the historical context and offering a unique, research- and
evidence-based perspective on the figure or event.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Solve complex biological problem sets assigned by instructor.
2. Determine and fulfill any preliminary requirements, practice, and present the speech.
3. Produce a painting that recognizably addresses the themes and subjects of the student's
Capstone project.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Because the student will work individually with an instructor to determine the requirements for
this course, materials will be up to the instructor and student to decide.

Created/Revised by: Tracy Johnson
Date: 12/06/2010

