BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HUM 22 - Greco-Roman Cultures
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the classical civilizations of Greece and Rome, through the study of
original sources of the ancient world in history, art, philosophy, poetry, music, and drama. The course
emphasizes the influence of Greek and Roman art, law, philosophy, politics, literature, and science on
the modern world. Specific works of key thinkers who contributed to the shaping of classical
civilization will be compared in order to trace the evolution of ideas.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the broad geographical, religious, aesthetic, social, cultural, economic, intellectual,
political and other forces that helped to shape the development of Western Civilization from
1700 B.C.E to 470 A.C.E.
B. Explain the similarities, differences, and interrelationships between specific civilizations of the
ancient world.
C. Analyze and compare specific works of key thinkers who contributed to the shaping of classical
civilization, and trace the influence of their ideas over time and across place.
D. Find, evaluate, and interpret primary and secondary source materials, and from them formulate
and communicate defensible interpretations of Greco-Roman cultures and their influence on the
modern world.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Humanities
2. Foundations of Early Greece
3. Homer and the Iliad
4. Greek Culture: Social, Religious and Political Aspects
5. Greek Drama and Art
6. Greek Historians
7. Introduction to Greek Philosophy
8. Plato
9. Aristotle
10. Foundations of Early Rome
11. Roman Culture: Social, Religious and Political Aspects
12. Introduction to Roman Philosophy
13. Epicureanism and Stoicism
14. Roman Art and Architecture

Hours
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00

15. Christianity; the Fall of Rome
Total Hours

4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. It is expected that a major part of the homework time will be spent in the reading and study of
primary documents, secondary sources, course readers, textbooks, literature.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
G. A minimum of 1500 written words is required.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Marcus Aurelius, Meditations. Come to class prepared to discuss how this work
reflects the beliefs of Stoicism as discussed during lecture.
2. Read Homer's Iliad. Be prepared to address questions showing how this primary source
reflects the notions of manhood in Greek Culture, specifically: Arete, Kleos, Hubris.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using Sophocles's Oedipus the King as your source, write a three-page essay in which you
respond to the following: What is the historical context of the period being discussed?
What is the storyline? Who is the author? What is the author's bias and how is it revealed?
Who is the intended audience? What type of document is it? What does this reveal about
the Greek culture?
2. After watching the movie 300, write a two-page essay that explores how Frank Miller's
depiction of events compares to those events as described by Herodotus in Histories and
The Battle of Thermopylae. Provide details, examples, and direct quotes from both 300
and Herodotus to illustrate your thinking.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Compare the city-states of Athens and Sparta using the worksheet provided.
Consider population, political organization, social structure, lifestyle and values, food,
education, gender roles, cultural achievements and legacy. Your main resources for Sparta
will be these primary sources: Xenophon, The Laws and Customs of the Spartans and
Herodotus, Histories. You should search the Internet for credible information on Athens,
as well as to complete your study of Sparta. In class, each student will choose a city-state
to defend as the premier city-state.
2. Drawing on credible secondary sources, write a magazine-style article on your assigned
Roman Emperor. The first page will be the title page of your magazine, and the back page
will be your bibliography. Include advertisements that are appropriate to the time period.
You will be writing this for your fellow Roman Citizens. Your emperor can be dead, and

you can address that, or you can discuss a particular event in his life. You are the reporter;
you can spin this however you think appropriate to the period and the type of magazine
you are writing (think Newsweek, Time Magazine, Rolling Stone Magazine, People
Magazine, National Enquirer, etc.). Be prepared to present your work in class,
highlighting the significance of the Emperor and the time in which he lived.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gochberg, D. S. Classics of Western Thought Series: The Ancient World. 4th Edition. Cengage,
1988.
B. Greer, T. & Lewis, G. A Brief History of the Western World. 9th Edition. Cengage Learning,
2005.
C. Perry, M. Sources of the Western Tradition, Volume I: From Ancient Times to the
Enlightenment . 9th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Literature, instructor packets.

Created/Revised by: Heidi Anderson
Date: 09/29/2014

