BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
HUM 17 - Comparative European Studies
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of the development of European identities, belief systems, philosophy, art,
architecture, music, science, and systems of government. It examines Western Europe after the fall of
Rome, focusing on cultural contributions of the Germanic Kingdoms, feudalism, the Catholic Church,
the High Middle Ages and the crisis of the 14th century, the early Renaissance, and the Reformation.
The course provides a comparative evaluation of how European traditions and perspectives came to
influence the world of ideas. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the broad geographical, religious, intellectual, and political patterns that developed in
Europe during the historical period, including religion and its political influence, notions of the
individual both politically and culturally, and distinctions and changes in the modes of art and
architecture.
B. Explain the similarities, differences, and interrelationships between specific European societies,
and identify their social, political, and cultural legacies.
C. Find, evaluate, and interpret primary and secondary source materials, and from them formulate
and communicate defensible interpretations of European traditions and perspectives and their
influence on the world of ideas.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Humanities
2. Introduction to the Middle Ages
3. Feudalism
4. Monasticism and the Church
5. Rites and Rituals of the Middle Ages
6. Chivalry and Medieval Literature
7. Myth and Its Cultural Significance
8. The Transformation of Europe in the 14th Century
9. Reflections of Death in Art and Literature
10. The Renaissance
11. Philosophy and Humanism
12. Renaissance and the Arts
13. The Reformation
14. Dynastic Monarchy

Hours
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

15. Diversity in the Arts
16. Shakespeare and English Drama
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. It is expected that a major part of the homework time will be spent in the reading and study of
primary documents, secondary sources, course readers, textbooks, literature.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Written Assignments
F. Class Discussion
G. A minimum of 1500 written words is required.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read William Marshal: The Flower of Chivalry, by Georges Duby. Be prepared to
address questions showing how this author reveals the concepts of Chivalry and the
political system of Feudalism during the life of the 1st Earl of Pembroke.
2. Read the play Everyman, reflecting on how the Black Death and the Church impacted the
lives of all persons living during that period. Be prepared to discuss at length during the
next class session.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using the primary sources Good Works and The 95 Theses, by Martin Luther, write a
three-page essay in which you respond to the following: What is the historical context of
the period? Who is the author and what is the author's bias? What type of documents are
these? What segment of the population is the author attempting to reach and why? What
are the story lines of each document? And lastly, what stands out as particularly
meaningful and how has Luther's message impacted the world as a whole?
2. Write a three-page essay on the image of your choice from The Woodcuts of Hans Holbein
the Younger, addressing the following questions: What is the historical context of the
period being discussed? What is the topic of the Woodcut? Who is the author? What is the
author's bias and how is it revealed? Who is the intended audience? What is the
significance and purpose of the image? In what ways does the image reveal notions and
beliefs regarding death during this historical period? What does this reveal about the
historical period?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Choose a rule from your reading of The Rule of Saint Benedict. After watching The
Making of a Medieval Manuscript, create your own manuscript page. Incorporate the rule
into your example of a manuscript page, using the illustrations from The Book of Kells as
your guide. Submit your illustrated manuscript page along with the required explanation

sheet, and be prepared to share with the class the design you have chosen, as well as the
the meaning and the importance of the rule, showing how it applies to Monastic Life.
2. Visual Essay Project: You have been assigned an artist; place a large image of your artist
at the center of your page. Surround your artist with 15 images of her/his work, providing
the title of each piece. Be prepared to share and discuss your visual essay with your fellow
students. Also, submit a two-page paper discussing your artist.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Thompson, K. F. Classics of Western Thought Series: Middle Ages, Renaissance, and
Reformation. 4th Edition. Cengage Learning, 1988.
B. Perry, M. Sources of the Western Tradition, Volume I: From Ancient Times to the
Enlightenment . 9th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2014.
C. Greer, T. & Lewis, G. A Brief History of the Western World. 9th Edition. Wadsworth-Cengage
Learning, 2005.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Literature, instructor packets.

Created/Revised by: Heidi Anderson
Date: 09/29/2014

