BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
IDST 90 - Special Topics
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course is a guided exploration of social and/or cultural activities and events that is designed to
expand the socio-cultural perspective of students. Students will prepare for, attend, and present reports
on a minimum of eight instructor-approved events, each of which will require an average of two
hours. Some activities might require an entrance and/or participation fee. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Locate and evaluate information that provides the cultural, economic, historic, and other
contexts for a specific social and/or cultural event.
B. Demonstrate an awareness of the range of possible meanings of a social and/or cultural event to
other participants.
C. Describe their personal experience as a participant in a social and/or cultural event.
D. Analyze a social and/or cultural event by synthesizing the impressions formed by personal
experience with the knowledge acquired through research.
E. Explain the value of social and/or cultural events as enhancements to the educational
experience.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Social and/or cultural events as objects of study
2. Researching available social and/or cultural events
3. Posing relevant questions about a social and/or cultural event
4. Researching the background/context of each social and/or cultural
event
5. Effective observation and/or participation in a social and/or cultural event
6. Preparing a presentation or report on a social and/or cultural event
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
4.00
5.00
2.00
2.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
B. Attendance at cultural events
C. Lecture
D. Discussion
E. Essays

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Essays
B. Oral presentations
C. Participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article on the history of Blues music. Be prepared to discuss your reading in class.
2. Read the New York Times review of a recent Martha Graham Dance Company
performance. In a short paper, compare and contrast your experience at the Martha
Graham Dance Company performance with the reviewer's comments.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In a short essay, describe your conversation with another participant at the soccer game
you attended recently. Where is that person from and why did they attend the game? Did
they enjoy the game, and why or why not?
2. Write a formal essay in which you explain the value, in terms of both your personal
enrichment and your educational experience, of the eight social and cultural events that
you attended this semester.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a cooking class in which you will prepare the Costa Rican dish "gallo pinto" and
write about your experience, including whether or not you like the dish.
2. Select a social or cultural event that you enjoy attending, and take a classmate with you to
that event. After the event, discuss with your classmate her or his experience and compare
it with your own.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. These will vary from semester to semester, according to availability.

Created/Revised by: Jo Anna Birdsall
Date: 12/05/2011

