BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
IDST 12 - Strategies for Success in Online Learning
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course prepares students for success in online learning. It covers the techniques of identifying the
requirements for each unique online course, best practices for successfully completing the course, and
the skills needed in using such online tools as discussion boards, email, blogs, and wikis. Students will
assess their own readiness to succeed online so they can focus on developing the particular skills
needed. Students must have access to a computer connected to the Internet. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Assess his or her readiness to be an online student.
B. Identify the requirements for an online course.
C. Formulate a plan for succeeding in an online course.
D. Operate online course tools.
E. Choose success strategies fitting to a particular online course.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Assessing readiness to learn online
2. Adapting learning styles to online content
3. Identifying online course requirements
4. Using online communication tools (email, discussions, blogs, journals,
wikis, chat)
5. Submitting quizzes and assignments
6. Applying study strategies to course content
7. Creating a best practices approach to online learning
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
4.00
1.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments

I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Projects
C. Journal
D. Written Assignments
E. Short papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned article on "brain science and procrastination" provided in class, and
summarize the report in 500 words in the class blog.
2. Read chapter 2 ("Create a Plan for Online Success") in "E-Learning Companion," then
answer the following T/F and multiple choice questions.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Given the strategies you have learned in this course, write a 1000-word essay
demonstrating their application to each 3 online courses taught at Butte College (must be
in three different disciplines).
2. Choose one of the online course syllabi provided and write a 500-word analysis of
"procrastination potential" (whether and how the course structure may encourage
procrastination). How would you recommend the course be changed?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview, in person or by email, one Butte College online instructor. The questions will
be provided in class.
2. Add comments to a VoiceThread role play that explains who is most responsible for the
student's failing grade.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Watkins, R. & Corry, M.. E-Learning Companion: A Student's Guide to Online Success. 3rd
Edition. Cengage Learning, 2011.
B. Bowman, L.. Online Learning: A User-Friendly Approach for High School and College
Students. 1st Edition. Rowman & Littlefield, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Daniel Barnett
Date: 04/02/2012

