BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
IDST 94 - Introduction to Service Learning
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

Introduction to Service Learning is designed by individual instructors for students who have a strong
interest in linking academic learning with community service. It is based on a collaborative effort
between the student, a faculty member, and a community based organization, school, business entity
or campus setting to provide real-world experience in a field of interest while meeting the needs of the
community. This course may also provide a service-learning component for a student enrolled in any
approved class.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply specific theories or concepts learned in the classroom to a community service experience.
B. Demonstrate a sense of civic awareness through meeting community needs.
C. Write and reflect on the volunteer experience and the contributions of volunteerism in a
community through journaling and written reflections.
D. Demonstrate personal development skills through an ability to establish and maintain productive
and constructive working relationships with off-campus organizations.
E. Practice teamwork and community building skills, recognize diversity in the community, and
examine community issues.
F. Identify community resources through the service-learning experience.
G. Recognize the value of his or her personal training and education through the service
experience.
H. Articulate the value of his or her personal training and education through the service experience.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. An Introduction to Service Learning
2. Service Learning in An Age of Accountability
3. Working with Community Organizations
4. Applying Theory to Service
5. Designing, Implementing and Participating in Service Projects
6. Evaluating Service Learning Projects
7. Making Reflections in Service Learning
8. Discussion of Reflection Papers: The Role of An Interdisciplinary Approach
to Meeting Community Needs
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
B. Instruction and Discussions
C. Students' Participation in Identified Community Service Project(s)
D. Journal Article Readings
E. Final Reflection Paper or Activity
F. Complete a minimum of 20 hours of service in the community
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Students will be evaluated on the basis of the following:
B. A final reflection paper or activitiy that links the students' learning experience to a community
based service. Such activity shall include a paper, oral presentation, journal, portfolio, dramtic
skit or oral presentation using PowerPoint or other presentation software.
C. The reflection paper or journal writing activity shall be based upon the
completion of a minimum of 20 hours of community
service for one unit of credit.
D. Completion of assignments.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read assigned text or journal articles on assessing community needs.
2. Read selected journal articles on the impact of service on the community.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a summary on a current service-learning topic.
2. Write a 3-5 page reflection paper on your service-learning experience.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete a minimum of 20 hours of service in the community.
2. Research current topics published in the "Journal of Service-Learning".
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cress, C.M.,Collier, P.J., & Reitenauer, V.L.. Learning Through Serving: A Student Guidebook
for Service-Learning Across the Disciplines. 1st Edition. Stylus Publishing, 2005.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Materials may vary according to class, but may include: (A) Surveys of community need; (B)
Journal articles with current research related to the particular course as applicable to
volunteerism and meeting community needs; (C) Audio-visuals, written and visual news clips,
and books and web-based articles related to public policy and service learning that are
applicable to the course or discipline under this umbrella course.

Created/Revised by: Jo Anna Birdsall
Date: 04/30/2012

