BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
ITAL 100 - Beginning Conversational Italian
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course emphasizes the development of basic understanding and speaking skills in Italian.
Minimal emphasis is placed on formal grammar. Multimedia cultural presentations are offered
throughout the course. This course is intended for those who wish to develop "survival" Italian in
everyday basic situations.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. demonstrate an understanding of spoken Italian at the basic level
B. demonstrate the skill of speaking Italian at the basic level
C. compare and contrast elements of Italian culture
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Discussion of culture in Italian-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the course.
Lecture
Topics
1. Pronunciation
2. Greetings
3. Days of the week, numbers, telling time
4. Nouns and articles
5. Numbers and gender agreement
6. Subject pronouns and verbs conjugation
7. Present tense
8. Interrogatives
9. Vocabulary pertaining to daily activities and travel
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.00
5.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
3.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Group activities
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a short text about the climates of different regions of Italy. Afterward, create a table
with the most important information, such as high temperatures and precipitation.
2. Read a diagram with statistics about recreational activities of Italian youth and describe
the information to a partner.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a short message to a friend describing the classes you are taking and your favorite
subject.
2. Write a brief diary entry about the day's events, in order to practice the past tense.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare outside of class an original skit based on a communicative context found in course
materials. Perform the skit in class.
2. Complete several "cloze" activities focused on accurate conjugation of verbs located in
the textbook or handout and bring to the next class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Manesi, Marcel. Learn Italian the Fast and Fun Way. 3 Edition. Barrons, 2007.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

