BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
JOUR 2 - Introduction to Reporting and Newswriting
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

An introduction to gathering, synthesizing/organizing and writing news in journalistic style across
multiple platforms. Includes role of the journalist and related legal and ethical issues. Students will
report and write based on their original interviews and research to produce news content. Experiences
may include covering speeches, meetings and other events, writing under deadline and use of AP
Style. (C-ID JOUR 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and execute newsgathering strategies
B. Develop interview questions and conduct interviews
C. Write simple leads
D. Write simple and complex/long form news articles using the inverted pyramid and other formats
E. Write articles under deadline
F. Apply Associated Press style to articles
G. Edit own and others’ articles for proper spelling, grammar and AP Style
H. Define writing differences for different platforms
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Information gathering, including live interviews
2. Journalistic writing forms, including inverted pyramid
3. Writing for multiple platforms, including print, online, broadcast and social
media
4. Newsgathering strategies
5. Newsgathering practice, including covering speeches, meetings and other
events
6. Writing under deadline
7. Introduction to Associated Press Style
8. Introduction to Search Engine Optimization
9. Writing leads
10. Writing simple and complex/long form articles
11. Legal and ethical issues in reporting
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Directed Discussion
D. Collaborative Analysis of News Articles
E. Textual Reading/Secondary Source Reading
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Written Assignments
C. Midterm and Final Exams consisting of Objective Portion and Newswriting Portion
D. Style Quizzes
E. Critiques
F. Professional protocols (meeting deadlines, attendance, adherence to ethics)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read community college newspapers from other campuses and identify strengths and
weaknesses in content and layout.
2. Read and analyze assigned newspaper articles. Identify the lead and type of story.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Edit drafts of articles for upcoming issues written by other students, identifying
journalistic strengths and weaknesses.
2. Write a news story about an on-campus event. Use quotes and paraphrases from an
interview with a participating student.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend on on-campus event and interview a college staff member using prepared list of
questions that show prior research into event.
2. Attend a local city council meeting and synthesize details from the meeting into a
500-word story showing the group’s concerns. Include opposing arguments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rich, C. Writing and Reporting the News: A Coaching Method. 7th Edition. Wadsworth
Publishing, 2012.
B. Yopp and McAdams. Reaching Audiences. 4th Edition. Allyn & Bacon, 2007.
C. Associated Press. AP Stylebook. Basic Books, 2004.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Related News Articles from current press
B. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Molly Emmons
Date: 11/17/2014

