BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
JPN 4 - Fourth Semester Japanese
Prerequisite(s): JPN 3
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the second half of intermediate Japanese, which further develops language skills:
reading, writing, listening comprehension and speaking. Through continued study of Japanese
language and culture students further increase their fluency and grammatical accuracy in the four skill
areas in expanded written analysis and discussion of both modern and classical Japanese texts.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. pronounce Japanese correctly with increased ease and clarity
B. comprehend intermediate-level Japanese with increased facility
C. speak with greater proficiency in Japanese at the intermediate level
D. write Japanese with greater grammatical accuracy at the intermediate level
E. formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition
F. describe elements of Japanese culture
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Japanese-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1.
Particles
2.
Kanji
3.
Suffixes
4.
Keigo (Speech forms)
5.
Transitive/ Intransitive verbs
6.
Passive Voice
7.
Causative
8.
Wishes
9.
Metaphors
10.
Reported Speech
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
7.00
16.00
15.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Japanese except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and be prepared to discuss the characters and main themes of a Japanese short story,
which typifies daily life in Japan during the previous century.
2. Read a short text about the climates of different regions of Japan. Afterward, create a table
with the most important information, such as high temperatures and precipitation.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze the socio-political relationship between the United States and Japan, critically
evaluating current events and interactions between the different governments and political
leaders.
2. Write an essay on the historical significance of the Japanese immigrants in the United
States as an integral part of this country’s history.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch and report on a political/social topic as presented on a news channel or in a journal
about Japan’s political/economic involvement with the United States.
2. Research the origins of a particular form of artistic expression from Japan (e.g., ‘Haiku’
poetry) and prepare a presentation for the class. While presenting the researched
information, will include various facts and examples relating to the expressive uniqueness
of that particular art form.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Benno, E.,Ohno, Y., Sakane, Y., &Shinagawa, C.. An Integrated Course in Elementary Japanese
GENKI. The Japan Times, 2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Japanese-English and English-Japanese Dictionary

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

