BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
JPN 1 - First Semester Japanese
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is a study of beginning Japanese emphasizing reading, writing, speaking, and listening
comprehension. It also introduces the student to various aspects of Japanese culture. Students who
have completed at least one, but fewer than two years of high school Japanese (or equivalent) with a
letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present date, should register for Second Semester
Japanese.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. recognize and begin to imitate Japanese pronunciation
B. comprehend basic Japanese at the introductory level
C. speak basic Japanese at the introductory level
D. write basic Japanese at the introductory level, specifically the letters of 'Hiragana' and
'Katakana'
E. formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition
F. describe elements of the Japanese culture
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Japanese-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Hiragana
2. Katakana
3. Kanji
4. Pronunciation
5. Numbers
6. Pronouns
7. Basic Sentence Structures with be-verbs
8. Basic Sentence Structures with regular-verbs
9. Particles
10. Present Tense Verb Conjugations
11. Past Tense Verb Conjugations
12. Present Tense Adjectival Conjugations
13. Past Tense Adjectival Conjugations
14. Sentences with Modal Auxiliaries

Hours
5.00
5.00
2.00
3.00
5.00
5.00
7.00
7.00
5.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
2.00

Total Hours

68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Japanese except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a series of brief descriptions about cultural pastimes commonly practiced by the
Japanese youth.
2. Read a text that describes the geography and climate of Japan, and discuss and compare
the climatic and geographic diversity in Japan and how that diversity influences Japanese
cultural practices.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a short message to a friend describing life as a college student, emphasizing the use
of common expressions relating to studies and personal interests.
2. Write a brief diary entry in Japanese about the day’s events, explaining typical daily
activities they engage in habitually.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research a particular part of Japan where s/he would be interested in traveling. Using
regionally specific information, each student will develop a list of questions (and possible
answers) that s/he might ask a local resident of that area.
2. Prepare an original skit working in a group, based on specific communicative language
learned in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Benno, E.,Ohno, Y., Sakane, Y., &Shinagawa, C.. An Integrated Course in Elementary Japanese
GENKI. The Japan Time, 2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Benno, E.,Ohno, Y., Sakane, Y., & Shinagawa, C.. An Integrated Course in Elementary
Japanese GENKI workbook, ed. The Japan Time, 1999

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

