BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
JPN 3 - Third Semester Japanese
Prerequisite(s): JPN 2
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the first half of intermediate Japanese, which further develops language skills: reading,
writing, listening comprehension and speaking. Through written analysis and discussion of both
modern and classical Japanese texts, students further increase their fluency and grammatical accuracy
in the four skill areas. Students who have completed at least three, but fewer than four years of high
school Japanese (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present date,
should register for Fourth Semester Japanese.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. pronounce Japanese accurately, with clarity and rhythm
B. comprehend Japanese at the intermediate level
C. speak basic Japanese at the intermediate level
D. read Japanese with specific attention to 'hiragana', 'katakana', as well as 'kanji' compounds at the
intermediate level
E. write Japanese with specific attention to 'hiragana', 'katagana', as well as 'kanji' compounds at
the intermediate level
F. describe elements of Japanese culture
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Japanese-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Particles
2. Kanji
3. Suffixes
4. Suffixes expressing: ability
5. Suffixes expressing: Desire (tai, hoshii)
6. Suffixes expressing: Necessity (nakuchaikemasen)
7. Suffixes expressing: Possibility (kamoshiremasen)
8. Inferences (ndesu)
9. Prediction (~deshou)
10. Listing Examples (~shi, ~tari)
11. Noun Phrases
12. Frequency

Hours
7.00
7.00
20.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
1.00
3.00
5.00
1.00

13. Intent
Total Hours

4.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. The class will be conducted in Japanese except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a short text about the climates of different regions of Japan. Afterward, create a table
with the most important information, such as high temperatures and precipitation
2. Read and be prepared to discuss the characters and main themes of a Japanese short story,
which typifies daily life in Japan during the previous century.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay on the historical significance of the Japanese immigrants in the United
States as an integral part of this country’s history.
2. Analyze the socio-political relationship between the United States and Japan, critically
evaluating current events and interactions between the different governments and political
leaders.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the origins of a particular form of artistic expression from Japan (e.g., ‘Haiku’
poetry) and prepare a presentation for the class. While presenting the researched
information, include various facts and examples relating to the expressive uniqueness of
that particular art form.
2. Watch and report on a political/social topic as presented on a news channel or in a journal
about Japan’s political/economic involvement with the United States.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Benno, E.,Ohno, Y., Sakane, Y., &Shinagawa, C.. An Integrated Course in Elementary Japanese
GENKI. The Japan Times, 2007.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

