BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
JPN 2 - Second Semester Japanese
Prerequisite(s): JPN 1
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the second half of beginning Japanese, which further develops language skills: reading,
writing, listening comprehension and speaking. In addition, this course introduces the student to
various aspects of the Japanese culture. Students who have completed at least two, but fewer than
three years of high school Japanese (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of
the present date, should register for Third Semester Japanese.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. improve the clarity of pronunciation in Japanese
B. increase comprehension of basic Japanese at the introductory level
C. speak Japanese with more complexity and diversity of expressions
D. improve writing of 'Kanji' at the introductory level
E. improve reading skills in Japanese at the introductory level
F. describe elements of Japanese culture
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Japanese-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1.
Te-form (Verb Conjugations)
2.
Suffixes with Te-form Verbs
3.
Subordinating Conjunctions
4.
Te-form (Adjectives and Nouns)
5.
Counters
6.
Particles
7.
Short form (Present Tense)
8.
Suffixes with Short form Verbs
9.
Short form (Past Tense)
10. Comparisons
11. Kanji
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
7.00
2.00
6.00
2.00
3.00
10.00
13.00
7.00
3.00
5.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Japanese except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a text that describes the geography and climate of Japan, and discuss and compare
the climatic and geographic diversity in Japan and how that diversity influences Japanese
cultural practices.
2. Students are to Read a series of brief descriptions about cultural pastimes commonly
practiced by the Japanese youth.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a brief diary entry in Japanese about the day’s events, explaining typical daily
activities.
2. Write a short message to a friend describing life as a college student, emphasizing the use
of common expressions relating to studies and personal interests.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare an original skit working in a group, based on a specific communicative language
learned in class.
2. Each student will Research a particular part of Japan where s/he would be interested in
traveling. Using regionally specific information, develop a list of questions (and possible
answers) that s/he might ask a local resident of that area.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Benno, E.,Ohno, Y., Sakane, Y., Shinagawa, C. An Integrated Course in Elementary Japanese
GENKI. The Japan Times, 2007.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. 1. Recommended Benno, E.,Ohno, Y., Sakane, Y., Shinagawa, C. An Integrated Course in
Elementary Japanese GENKI workbook, ed. The Japan Times, 1999 The textbook will be
revised in 2011.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

