BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 1 - Introduction to Kinesiology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the interdisciplinary approach to the study of human movement. An
overview of the importance of the sub-disciplines in kinesiology will be discussed along with career
opportunities in the areas of teaching, coaching, allied health, and fitness professions. (C-ID KIN
100).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify the basic concepts of kinesiology.
B. describe the historical, ethical, and philosophical foundations of kinesiology.
C. identify the fundamental concepts of basic movements.
D. identify the relationship between performance in the movement forms of sport, dance, and
exercise and the conceptual foundations of the sub-disciplines.
E. identify the pathways and requirements for career opportunities.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Basic concepts of kinesiology
2. Historical, ethical, and philosophical foundations of kinesiology
3. Overview of basic movement forms of sport, dance, and exercise with a
focus on the sub-disciplines within kinesiology
4. Introduction to the sub-disciplines: motor learning/control, motor
development, biomechanics, exercise physiology, social psychological
foundations, and sport nutrition
5. Exploration of pathways and career opportunities: Allied health, sport,
fitness, teaching, and coaching
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
12.00
12.00
12.00

12.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION

A. Projects
B. Journal
C. Written Assignments
D. Written or Oral Examinations
E. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article that describes the history of kinesiology and its evolution over the past
twenty years. Be prepared to share three key findings in small groups.
2. Review three articles that describe the psychology of sport and how emotions, thoughts,
and behaviors impact results in performance. Be prepared to discuss these concepts in
class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Choose one area of the following sub-disciplines of kinesiology on which to write a three
page essay: motor learning/control, motor development, biomechanics, exercise
physiology, social psychological foundations, and sport nutrition.
2. Write a two page essay describing the basic movement forms of sport, dance, and
exercise. Be prepared to make a five minute presentation to the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit three different events or activities with varying age groups to observe differences in
muscular strength, endurance, proprioception, and spacial awareness. Events or activities
need to be from the following age groups; 12 and under, high school, and college or
professional. Be prepared to present your findings to the class.
2. Pick a specific skill in a sport and research the necessary muscles to perform this
movement. Report your findings in bullet form and be prepared to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hoffman, S.J. Introduction to Kinesiology: Studying Physical Activity. 4th Edition. Human
Kinetics, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 03/04/2013

