BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 31 - Quickfits
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
17 hours Lecture
34 hours Lab

1.5 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to effective body shaping strategies that can be completed in short
intervals. These exercises are designed for individuals with a busy lifestyle and can be performed with
simple equipment. Students will learn proper body position and alignment, exercises that isolate and
overload targeted muscle groups, and compound muscle movements.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify exercise guidelines for healthy adults.
B. recognize and demonstrate proper body positioning and alignment during exercise.
C. identify the benefits of resistance training and cardiovascular training.
D. analyze the risks of sedentarism and the benefits of an active lifestyle.
E. devise a physical activity plan to fit a busy schedule
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation and Introduction
2. Fitness Self-Assessments and Goals
3. Exercise Guidelines for Healthy Adults
4. Quickfits Exercises
5. Biomechanical importance and details of each Quickfits Exercise: Position,
Alignment, Isolation, and Repetitions (PAIR)
6. The Damaging Physiological Effects of Sedentary Behavior and the Health
Value of 5 Minute Fitness Breaks
7. Quickfits Workout Sequences
8. Exercise Modifications and Techniques for Personal Limitations
9. Common Exercise Errors and their Corrections
10. Exercise Motivation
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
4.00
1.00
3.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Orientation and Introduction
2. Fitness Self-Assessments and Goals
3. Quickfits Exercises

Hours
1.00
2.00
6.00

4. Implementation and Practice of the PAIR Exercises
5. Quickfits Workout Sequences
6. Modifications and Techniques for Personal Limitations
7. Common Exercise Errors and their Corrections
Total Hours

10.00
7.00
5.00
3.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Drills/Practice
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Written Assignments
C. Written or Oral Examinations
D. Practical Evaluations
E. Class Discussion
F. Activity Journals
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the detailed instructions for setup and execution of Quickfits exercise #1 and
demonstrate proficiency. Be prepared to discuss the importance of correct anatomical
alignment during exercise.
2. Read the chapter in the book that gives the guidelines for exercise for healthy adults and
interpret for practical application. Be prepared to discuss in class the application of these
guidelines to daily activity.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page essay describing the exercise guidelines for healthy adults with
specificity to the four basic modalities and recommended weekly practice.
2. Write a two page essay defining sedentarism and explain the damaging effects of
sedentarism upon human health in terms of disease risk biomarkers.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice incorporating short segments of activity into your day. Be prepared to discuss
your experience in class.
2. Create an exercise sequence for a total body workout utilizing Quickfits exercises. Share
your sequence in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Whyte, Greg. Fit in 5: 5, 10, & 30 Minute Workouts for a Leaner, Stronger Body. 1st Edition.
Human Kinetics, 2009.
B. Muelrath, L. Fit Quickies: 5 Minute, Targeted Body-Shaping Workouts. Alpha Books
(Penguin), 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Athletic apparel

B. Large physioball or its equivalent
C. Belt or strap for stretching

Created/Revised by: Lani Muelrath
Date: 03/04/2013

