BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 8 - Athletic Training and Sports Medicine Practicum
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: KIN 7 and Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course offers students practical, hands-on experience within the field of sports medicine and
athletic training. Instruction will focus on the prevention and immediate care of athletic injuries.
Students will learn rehabilitation and management skills, emergency procedures, nutrition, sports
psychology, musculo-skeletal anatomy, therapeutic modalities, and various taping/wrapping
techniques. Students will experience various sports medicine career fields such as strength and
conditioning, physical therapy, orthopedic medicine, and athletic training. This course may be
repeated three times to meet the admission requirements at an accredited Athletic Training program.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify and apply proper taping techniques for specific athletic injuries.
B. list career fields and employment settings associated with athletic training and sports medicine.
C. list and identify common anatomical landmarks associated with athletic injuries.
D. describe a well designed athletic training facility, including supplies and equipment.
E. recognize athletic injuries and demonstrate emergency procedures.
F. describe proper return to play concussion protocols for athletes.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Introduction and orientation
2. Roles and responsibilities of the athletic trainer
3. Organization and administration
4. Prevention of athletic injuries
5. Emergency Action Plan (EAP)
6. Standard wound procedure/Bloodborne pathogens
7. Evaluation: History, Observation, Palpation, Special tests (HOPS) and
sports injury assessment
8. Recognition of athletic injuries: Lower leg, ankle, foot
9. Recognition of athletic injuries: Knee
10. Recognition of athletic injuries: Hip and groin
11. Recognition of athletic injuries: Spine and neck
12. Recognition of athletic injuries: Elbow, lower arm, wrist, hand
13. Recognition of athletic injuries: Shoulder and upper arm
14. Recognition of athletic injuries: Head and face
15. Recognition of athletic injuries: Internal

Hours
1.00
2.00
2.50
2.50
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.50
3.00
2.00

16. Treatment and management of athletic injuries
17. Rehabilitation and therapeutic modalities
18. Environmental disorders and concerns
Total Hours

5.00
4.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Field Experience/Internship
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Journal
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the National Athletic Trainers' Association position statement on spinal injuries. Be
prepared to discuss findings in class.
2. Research two different concussion software programs currently being used in athletics.
Plan to discuss the pros and cons of each in small groups.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay describing an injury of your choice, including injury care, prevention, and
rehabilitation.
2. Based on your observation of the daily operations in the Sports Medicine Center, write a
two page essay describing which aspect of athletic training you most enjoyed and why.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview an athlete who has suffered a significant injury. Ask questions about the daily
interactions and challenges faced with rehabilitation and treatment. Provide a one page
outline documenting your interview.
2. Design a supply list, floor plan, and budget analysis for a sports medicine facility that is
1200 square feet with a $4,000 supply budget and $10,000 equipment budget. Be prepared
to make a five minute presentation in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Prentice & Arnheim. Essentials of Athletic Injury Management. 9th Edition. McGraw-Hill,
2012.
B. Konin, Wiksten, Isear, Brader. Special Tests for Orthopedic Examination. 3rd Edition. Slack,
2006.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 12/10/2012

