BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 2 - Introduction to Coaching
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines and discusses academic, professional, and standard requirements of the
coaching profession. Students will be expected to focus upon and understand the discipline and
breadth of the coaching profession. Topics include philosophies, goals, objectives, ethical standards,
desired qualities, and current professional issues.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. describe the physical, emotional, and mental demands of the coaching profession.
B. identify and discuss general requirements, standards, characteristics, and qualities needed for a
career in coaching.
C. compare and contrast current issues, problems, and concerns facing athletics, student-athletes
and coaches.
D. analyze and apply theories and practices required of the coaching profession.
E. employ the skills and strategies required to search, apply, and interview for available coaching
positions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Student Orientation to Course Requirements and Expectations / Student
Introductions
2. Examining A Coaching Career
3. Current Issues/Problems/Concerns in Coaching
4. Examining Ethical Standards and Ethical Dilemmas
5. Exploring Desired Coaching Qualities
6. Required Roles Of A Head Coach
7. Team Cohesion/Individual Dynamics/Effective Communication
8. Assistant Coaching Qualities
9. Coaching And The Personal Life
10. Recruiting Process: Geared to High School and From High School
11. Building a Program Through Special Relationships
12. Off-Season Planning
13. Pre-Season and In Season Planning/Preparation
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
7.00
3.00
3.00
7.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research a current issue in the coaching profession and be preparded to discuss in your
small groups.
2. Read the chapter specific to professional position interviews and plan to share your
perspective in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a descriptive essay on program development for a high school sport of your interest.
2. Write a 1-2 page essay based on an interview of an active or retired coach from the high
school level or above.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe a live practice across any level focusing on the methods and practice efficiencies
used.
2. Observe a coach at any level during game competition utilizing their game plan,
adjustments, strategies, personnel, and staff.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Sabock, R.J. & Sabock, M.D.. Coaching: A Realistic Perspective. 10th Edition. Rowman &
Littlefield, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Russ Critchfield
Date: 10/29/2012

