BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 23 - Weight Training I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
17 hours Lecture
34 hours Lab

1.5 Unit(s)

This course provides instruction in the fundamental techniques of weight training. Students will
engage in individualized exercise programs with emphasis placed on the development of muscle
strength, muscle endurance and flexibility. Instruction will include identification and proper technique
for lifts specific to muscle groups to ensure safe fitness training.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. demonstrate the techniques of weight training specific to Bench Press, Squat, Pull ups, and Dead
Lift.
B. demonstrate proper safety techniques including spotting, racking weights, and selection of
weights for an individual workout.
C. demonstrate proper weight room etiquette as it applies to appropriate clothing, appropriate
footwear, and the use of equipment.
D. identify the benefits of weight training to promote life-long fitness.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation
2. Introduction to Weight Room Machines and Free Weights
3. Safety Procedures and Proper Spotting Techniques
4. Discuss and Perform Different Types of Lifting Programs
5. Discuss and Demonstrate Over-Training and Over-Use
6. Individual Training Programs
7. Group Training Programs
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
1.00
4.00
3.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Orientation
2. Introduction to Weight Room Machines and Free Weights
3. Safety Procedures and Proper Spotting Techniques
4. Discuss and Perform Different Types of Lifting Programs
5. Discuss and Demonstrate Over-Training and Over-Use

Hours
2.00
4.00
4.00
8.00
2.00

6. Individual Training Programs
7. Group Training Programs
Total Hours

8.00
6.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Written or Oral Examinations
E. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout on muscle anatomy and the physiological effects of weight training. Be
prepared to discuss findings in class.
2. Research an article about safety issues associated with weight training and present
findings in a short write.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 6 week individual workout plan that focuses on muscular strength, muscle
endurance, or muscle tone.
2. Maintain a semester long journal documenting your progress and fitness gains.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a local health club observing the different workouts being performed by members
along with the different equipment being used. Be prepared to demonstrate three new
exercises observed.
2. Interview a professional currently working in the fitness field to discuss current trends,
educational background, and job opportunities. Report your interview results in a 1-page
essay.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fleck, Steven and Kraemer, William. Designing Resistance Training Programs. 4th Edition.
Human Kinetics, 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The student will be required to provide:
a. Athletic apparel b. Athletic shoes
B. Other materials and/or equipment will be provided by the department.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 12/10/2012

