BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 82 - Varsity Cross Country
3 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Student-athletes currently participating in Intercollegiate
Athletics
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
153 hours Lab
This course is designed for students who meet the criteria to compete in intercollegiate cross country.
All varsity sports entail practice at designated times. Since skills/proficiencies are enhanced by
supervised repetition and practice, this course may be repeated three times.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. define cross-country safety and rules.
B. practice the proper etiquette of cross-county competition.
C. describe race strategies for intercollegiate competition.
D. assess the environmental conditions and describe appropriate activity levels.
E. demonstrate pre-race, race and post-race physical routines.
F. demonstrate proper maintenance of individual equipment and the course.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1.
Orientation and Safety
2.
Tempo Pace Workout
3.
Distance Runs and Strides
4.
Hill Intervals
5.
Easy Run, Repeat or Competition
6.
Long Run
7.
Speed Workout and Circuit Training
8.
Weight Training for Runners
9.
Racing Techniques and Strategies
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Discussion
B. Demonstrations
C. Reading Assignments
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Drills/Practical

Hours
2.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
21.00
22.50
20.50
15.00
12.00
153.00

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Written or Oral Examinations
C. Practical evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read two or three articles describing safe and appropriate warm up techniques and the
benefits of them for injury prevention. Plan to demonstrate in small groups.
2. Research the differences between the "heel-toe" ground contact and the "cut foot"
technique. Be prepared to discuss in class the benefits of each during competition.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a brief paper describing the basic principles of muscle endurance in relation to
Cross Country events and preparation.
2. Write a short essay describing the proper nutritional needs for the body in order to
maximize your competition level and recovery. Paper should be between 1-2 pages with
works cited.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Perform a portion of your individual workout plan and maintain a journal (minimum 2
weeks) documenting changes in body composition and performance.
2. Participate in a community run of your choice. This should be a "fun" run and can be done
at any pace and be prepared to share your experience in class discussion.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The student will be required to provide:
a. Proper cross country attire b. Proper cross country shoes
B. Other materials and/or equipment will be provided by the department.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 03/04/2013

