BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 9 - Introduction to Personal Fitness Training
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the academic and professional requirements for personal fitness training.
Students will become familiar with anatomy and physiology, fitness evaluations, weight room
program design, and nutrition. Philosophies, goals, objectives, and occupational ethics will be
discussed and examined and practical skills will be demonstrated.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. describe the benefits of personal fitness training as it relates to a wide variety of client
populations.
B. demonstrate improvement and refinement of the skills and knowledge of program design,
motivational strategies, and client retention.
C. identify current trends and terminology in the fitness industry.
D. analyze and interpret research based literature.
E. organize and present theoretical and practical aspects of common training protocols as it applies
to personal fitness training.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation
2. Basic human anatomy and human physiology
3. Bioenergetics
4. Biomechanics/ Kinesiology
5. Resistance Training
6. Aerobic Training
7. Nutritional guidelines for fitness training
8. Client consultation and fitness assessment
9. Exercise Techniques

Hours
1.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
10.00

A. Body weight exercise
B. Resistance exercise
C. Cardiovascular exercise
10. Program Design
11. Training special populations
12. Legal issues and considerations
Total Hours

8.00
3.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a professional article describing proper training for a client with a specific injury.
Choose an injury you feel would be common in the workplace and plan to discuss in small
groups.
2. Review the basic concepts of "muscle confusion" training and be prepared to implement in
a program design.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a nutritional and exercise plan designed to reduce the level of body fat in a client.
2. Write an essay describing an injury, how it occurred, possible treatments and prevention.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Design a three week program for a family member taking into account nutritional
guidelines, cardiovascular and strength training. Maintain a journal describing progress.
2. Visit a "traditional" fitness facility and a "cross fit" facility and compare the differences in
personal training.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Coburn, J.W. & Malek, M.H.. NSCA's Essentials of Personal Training. Human Kinetics, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Jeffrey Jordan
Date: 10/29/2012

