BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 11 - First Aid and CPR
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
42.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course involves the theory and detailed demonstration of the first aid care of the injured. The
student will learn to assess a victim’s condition and incorporate proper treatment. Standard first aid,
CPR, and AED certification(s) will be granted upon successful completion of requirements. (C-ID
KIN 101).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. assess victims of injury and medical emergencies and apply emergency action plan.
B. describe the signs and symptoms associated with common medical emergencies.
C. demonstrate the first aid care that is needed in common medical emergencies.
D. demonstrate cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the use of AED.
E. demonstrate bandaging and splinting techniques.
F. demonstrate emergency rescue moves.
G. evaluate their lifestyle for health and safety concerns and set personal goals for achieving a safe
and healthy lifestyle.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Body Systems
2. Victim Assessment
3. Legal Issues
4. Emergency Action Plan
5. Care for emergencies: breathing, cardiac, choking, bleeding, shock,
anaphylaxis and special circumstances (sudden illness, poisoning, bites,
stings, and heat and cold emergencies)
6. AED – Automatic External Defibrillator
7. Internal/Soft Tissue injuries and burns
8. Musculoskeletal injuries: head, spine, bone, joint, and extremities
9. Splinting and immobilization
10. Moving victims
11. People with special needs
12. Healthy lifestyles and safety measures
Total Hours
Lab

Hours
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
4.00

3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
42.50

Topics
1. Body Systems
2. Victim Assessment
3. Emergency Action Plan
4. Care for emergencies: breathing, cardiac, choking, bleeding, shock,
anaphylaxis and special circumstances (sudden illness, poisoning, bites,
stings, and heat and cold emergencies)
5. AED – Automatic External Defibrillator
6. Internal/Soft Tissue injuries and burns
7. Musculoskeletal injuries: head, spine, bone, joint, and extremities
8. Splinting and immobilization
9. Moving victims
10. People with special needs
11. Healthy lifestyles and safety measures
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
5.50

2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Practical Evaluations
G. Written and practical certification tests
H. Practical skill tests designed to evaluate the students ability to perform practical skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a minimum of two articles describing anaphylactic shock, including signs,
symptoms and treatment. Be prepared to discuss your findings in small groups.
2. Research the warning signs and symptoms of a heart attack. Be prepared to discuss the
initial steps to take for treatment.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 2-3 page essay describing the actions to take for both conscious and unconscious
choking victims. Cover adult, child, and infant age groups.
2. In a one page short write describe three ways to reduce the risk of disease transmission
while performing CPR. Plan to discuss in small groups.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View several videos online that demonstrate when and how to move a victim in an

emergency situation. Note the differences in each of the scenarios and be prepared to share
in class.
2. Review techniques and protocols for both one and two person CPR and AED rescue. Be
prepared to discuss when each technique and protocol is appropriate.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. American Heart Association or American Red Cross textbooks, manuals, and support materials.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 04/29/2013

