BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 5 - Sports Officiating
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course will introduce the student to the structure and application of sports officiating. Emphasis
will be placed on specific rules governing different sports. Topics will include enforcement, etiquette,
and ethics in officiating athletic contests. Students will apply topics learned in lecture to officiate
simulated athletic contests.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. explain how an official contributes to sportmanship and fair play during a game.
B. describe the professional requirements and procedures for becoming a registered official in
selected sports.
C. identify fouls and violations in selected sports and administer proper penalty and enforcement.
D. identify safety issues of selected sports.
E. describe the official rules and regulations of selected sports.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
2. Professional requirements of officials
3. Career opportunities
4. Official’s responsibilities, ethics, and equipment
5. Rules and techniques of sport
6. Practical officiating skills of baseball/softball
7. Practical evaluation of baseball/softball
8. Practical officiating skills of basketball
9. Practical evaluation of basketball
10. Practical officiating skills of volleyball
11. Practical evaluation of volleyball
12. Practical officiating skills of football
13. Practical evaluation of football
14. Evaluating officials
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
5.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Practical evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article describing how to become a registered sports official. Be prepared to
discuss requirements in class.
2. Research how an official contributes to sportsmanship and fair play during a game. You
will be discussing specific examples of past officiating calls in small groups.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Describe the qualities needed to be a competent sports official for a game, including
responsibilities, ethics, and equipment.
2. Write an essay identifying the official rules of a selected sport and the techniques used to
officiate a game.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a local sports official, asking for information on the physical, mental, and social
demands placed on officials. Be prepared to share your findings with your class.
2. Observe officials at a local high school or college athletic event. Be prepared to discuss
how they identified fouls and violations and administered proper penalties.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. American Sport Education Program. Successful Sports Officiating. 2nd Edition. Human
Kinetics, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. NCAA Sports Rules Guides (current issue)

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 12/10/2012

