BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 10 - Personal Fitness Training Practicum
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course is a personal fitness training practicum, including anatomy and physiology, fitness
evaluations, weight room and program design, and nutrition. Students will be assigned to shadow
professional fitness trainers and strength coaches assisting in daily training regimens.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. discuss fitness program design, motivational strategies, and client retention.
B. identify current trends and terminology in the fitness industry.
C. evalutate posture, range of movement and muscle strength.
D. maintain and demonstrate proper use of a broad range of fitness equipment.
E. explain healthy eating habits and design an exercise plan to reduce the level of body fat.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1.
Orientation
2.
Fitness administration
3.
Client consultation and fitness assessment
4.
Individual training
5.
Group/ Team Training
6.
Resistance training protocols
7.
Aerobic training protocols
8.
Body weight exercise technique
9.
Resistance exercise technique
10. Cardiovascular exercise technique
11. Training special populations
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
7.00
7.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Field Experience/Internship
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations

F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Practical Evaluations
G. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Please read the NSCA requirements to become a Certified Personal Trainer (C-PT) and be
prepared to discuss the differences of other organization certifications.
2. Review a professional journal article that discusses the nutritional needs of general clients
and athletic clients.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three week nutritional plan for a moderately fit client that has goals of running in a
half marathon. Be sure to take into account nutritional balance and workout requirements.
2. Write a one-page essay comparing the differences between "traditional" training and
"cross fit" training.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview two personal fitness trainers currently active in the profession. Gather
information specific to experience, education, changes within the profession, and lifestyle.
2. Visit three local fitness facilities to examine the layout of exercise areas and equipment.
Based on your observation, design a facility that would be an ideal working environment
for you as a professional.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Coburn, J.W. & Malek, M.H.. NSCA's Essentials of Personal Training. Human Kinetics, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 10/29/2012

