BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 7 - Introduction to Athletic Training and Sports Medicine
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the prevention, evaluation, and treatment of athletic injuries.
Students will learn rehabilitation and management skills, emergency procedures, nutrition, sports
psychology, musculo-skeletal anatomy, therapeutic modalities, and various taping/wrapping
techniques. The course is designed to expose students to sports medicine career fields such as strength
and conditioning, physical therapy, orthopedic medicine, and athletic training.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. define the medical terminology and acronyms specific to athletic training and sports medicine.
B. identify the features of a well designed athletic training facility, including supplies and
equipment.
C. list and identify common and anatomical landmarks associated with athletic injuries.
D. identify proper sports medicine supplies for injury treatment.
E. explain the role of the athletic trainer, team physician, and athletic director within the sports
medicine team.
F. demonstrate basic injury treatment and taping procedures.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to athletic training and sports medicine
2. Athletic Training Education Programs (ATEP) and sports medicine careers
3. Roles and responsibilities of the athletic trainer
4. Organization and administration
5. Prevention of athletic injuries
6. Emergency Action Plan (EAP)
7. Standard wound procedure/Bloodborne pathogens
8. Evaluation: History, Observation, Palpation, Special tests (HOPS) and
sports injury assessment
9. Recognition of athletic injuries: Lower leg, ankle, foot
10. Recognition of athletic injuries: Knee
11. Recognition of athletic injuries: Hip and groin
12. Recognition of athletic injuries: Spine and neck
13. Recognition of athletic injuries: Elbow, lower arm, wrist, hand
14. Recognition of athletic injuries: Shoulder and upper arm
15. Recognition of athletic injuries: Head and face

Hours
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.50
2.50
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.50
3.00

16. Recognition of athletic injuries: Internal
17. Treatment and management of athletic injuries
18. Rehabilitation and therapeutic modalities
19. Environmental disorders and concerns
Total Hours

2.00
3.00
4.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Demonstration
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
F. Written or Oral Examinations
G. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research the psychological effects an injury can have on an athlete. Plan to discuss in
small groups.
2. Read an article describing how each member of a Sports Medicine Team interacts with an
athlete that has an injury. Be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a detailed Emergency Action Plan (EAP) that should be performed immediately
following an athletic injury. Be prepared to present your EAP to the class.
2. Write an essay describing the physiological effects of heat and cold and the benefits they
have for treating athletic injuries.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a local athletic event and observe the various equipment and measures used in the
prevention of athletic injuries. Note your findings in a one-page essay.
2. Observe an athlete receiving injury care from a member of a Sports Medicine Team.
Discuss some of the challenges this member faced during his/her interaction.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Prentice, W.E.. Essentials of Athletic Injury Management. 9th Edition. McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc., 2012.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 12/10/2012

