BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 14B - Theory of Cross Country II
2 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): KIN 14A
Limitation on Enrollment: Student-athletes currently participating in Intercollegiate
Athletics
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
This course provides instruction in the intermediate techniques and strategies of cross country as the
sport has developed and is played at secondary, intercollegiate, and professional levels. Emphasis will
be placed on the mental aspect of cross country, team play, biomechanics, and film study at an
intermediate level.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. evaluate changes in the rules of cross country at the intercollegiate level.
B. evaluate teamwork and cooperation between players, coaches and team personnel through film
study at an intermediate level.
C. compare and contrast game strategies that are situation specific at an intermediate level.
D. explain differences between appropriate and inappropriate leadership.
E. identify cross country specific techniques and biomechanics at an intermediate level.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Philosophy
2.
Coach and Athlete Relationship
3.
Practice Organization and Safety
4.
Selection of Personnel
5.
Fundamental Skills
6.
Game Strategies and Rules
7.
Mental Approach and Strategies
8.
Scouting and Statistics (Film Review)
9.
Game and Trip Organization
10. Public Relations
11. Leadership
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture

C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and review a scouting report on a specific opponent to identify weaknesses and
strengths. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Review “Wooden’s Pyramid of Success” to identify aspects of leadership. Be prepared to
present your findings to the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a brief paper summarizing the changes to rules for intercollegiate cross country
over the past three seasons.
2. Maintain a semester long journal on preparation habits for sport success, specific to:
sleep/rest, diet, strength training, mental approach, social habits and academics.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Analyze three films of a sport of your choice with a focus on team play and strategies. Be
prepared to share your analysis in class.
2. Research three individuals in leadership roles and focus on leadership styles and strategies.
Be prepared to share your analysis in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Kaplan, D. VOQ Training for Cross Country & Track: A Coach's Year-Round Guide to
Maximized Performance, Extended Peaks, and Injury-Free Distance Running via the Inverted
Pyramid's Volume-of-Quality Training . 1st Edition. CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Other materials and/or equipment will be provided by the department.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 11/18/2013

