BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 14A - Theory of Cross Country I
2 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Student-athletes currently participating in Intercollegiate
Athletics
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
This course provides instruction in the basic techniques and strategies of cross country as the sport has
developed and is played at secondary, intercollegiate, and professional levels. Emphasis will be placed
on the mental aspect of cross country, team play, biomechanics, and film study at a basic level.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. distinguish between the rules of cross country across the different levels of participation.
B. evaluate teamwork and cooperation between players, coaches and team personnel through film
study at a basic level.
C. compare and contrast game strategies that are situation specific at a basic level.
D. explain differences between appropriate and inappropriate sportsmanship.
E. identify cross country specific techniques and biomechanics at a basic level.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Philosophy
2.
Coach and Athlete Relationship
3.
Practice Organization and Safety
4.
Selection of Personnel
5.
Fundamental Skills
6.
Game Strategies and Rules
7.
Mental Approach and Strategies
8.
Scouting and Statistics (Film Review)
9.
Game and Trip Organization
10. Public Relations
11. Sportsmanship
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion

D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review “Wooden’s Pyramid of Success” to identify aspects of team work and success. Be
prepared to present your findings to the class.
2. Read and review a scouting report on a specific opponent to identify weaknesses and
strengths. Be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a brief paper describing the basic principles of muscle endurance in relation to
Cross Country events.
2. Maintain a semester long journal on preparation habits for sport success, specific to:
sleep/rest, diet, strength training, mental approach, social habits and academics.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View a Cross Country event and report your observations as they address conduct, rules,
and techniques.
2. Analyze three films of a sport of your choice with a focus on team play and strategies. Be
prepared to share your analysis in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Kaplan, D. VOQ Training for Cross Country & Track: A Coach's Year-Round Guide to
Maximized Performance, Extended Peaks, and Injury-Free Distance Running via the Inverted
Pyramid's Volume-of-Quality Training . 1st Edition. CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Other materials and/or equipment will be provided by the department.

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 11/18/2013

