BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 84 - Varsity Golf
3 Unit(s)
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Student-athletes currently participating in Intercollegiate
Athletics
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
153 hours Lab
This course is designed for students who meet the criteria to compete in intercollegiate golf. All
varsity sports entail practice at designated times. Since skills/proficiencies are enhanced by supervised
repetition and practice, this course may be repeated three times.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. define golf safety and rules.
B. practice the proper etiquette of golf competition.
C. describe tournament play strategies for intercollegiate competition.
D. perform golf skills at a level appropriate for intercollegiate competition.
E. demonstrate the physical routines necessary for intercollegiate golf competition.
F. demonstrate proper maintenance of individual equipment and the course.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Orientation and Introduction
2. Swing fundamentals
3. Fundamentals and use of wedges, short, middle and long irons
4. Fundamentals and use of woods
5. Techniques of the short, middle and long putts
6. Competitive strategy
7. United States Golf Association (USGA) and local rules
8. Etiquette and competitive behavior
9. Inter-squad competition
10. Evaluation
11. Research: Books and articles
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
14.50
15.50
15.50
15.50
14.00
25.00
17.50
18.50
10.00
5.00
153.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Discussion
B. Demonstrations
C. Reading Assignments
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Drills/Practical
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Written or Oral Examinations
C. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a minimum of two articles describing proper conduct on and off of the golf course.
Be prepared to discuss and chart information in small groups.
2. Research an article that outlines the history of golf and the impact the sport has had on
society. Plan to discuss findings in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. List each type of golf club and provide a brief description or examples of how you would
use them on the course.
2. Write a paper discussing golf swing fundamentals. Paper should include works cited and
be 1-2 pages in length.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View a major golf event and report your observations of rules, conduct, and techniques to
the class.
2. Perform a portion of your workout plan (minimum 2 weeks) and maintain a journal
documenting changes in body composition and play.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The student will be required to provide:
a. Proper golf attire b. Proper golf shoes
B. Other materials and/or equipment will be provided by the department

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 03/04/2013

