BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
KIN 24 - Weight Training II
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: KIN 23
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
17 hours Lecture
34 hours Lab

1.5 Unit(s)

This course builds upon the foundation of basic weight training by examining different styles and
muscle specificity to individualized programs. Components of fitness will be emphasized including
muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility, and body composition. Students will learn weight
training guidelines for general fitness, sport performance, and bodybuilding.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. demonstrate the techniques of weight training specific to the overhead squat, push press, and
alternating dumbbell bench press.
B. differentiate between weight training specific workouts for sport performance, bodybuilding,
and general fitness.
C. identify the benefits of different weight training styles such as crossfit, circuit training, stability
balls, exercise bands, and core training.
D. demonstrate the proper safety techniques for advanced weight training exercises.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation and Introduction
2. Program Development: Free Weights vs. Machines
3. Weight Room Safety Procedures and Advanced Spotting Techniques
4. Lifting Programs: Circuit, Crossfit, Muscular Strength, Muscular Endurance,
Core, and Flexibility
5. Recognize and Discuss the difference between Over-Training and Over-Use
6. General Fitness Program Design
7. Sports Performance Program Design
8. Bodybuilding Program Design
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Orientation and Introduction
2. Program Development: Free Weights vs. Machines
3. Weight Room Safety Procedures and Advanced Spotting Techniques
4. Lifting Programs: Circuit, Crossfit, Muscular Strength, Muscular Endurance,
Core, and Flexibility

Hours
1.00
2.00
6.00
4.00

5. General Fitness Program Implementation
6. Sports Performance Program Implementation
7. Bodybuilding Program Implementation
Total Hours

9.00
6.00
6.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article on nutrition and dietary supplements for bodybuilding. Be prepared to
discuss in small groups your findings.
2. Research a sport specific weight training program and be prepared to discuss in class the
types of workout, the macro or micro cycle, and the expected results.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 2-page essay on the pros and cons of steroid use. Address the history, physical
implications, and overall health.
2. Design a six week program specific to sport performance, bodybuilding, or general fitness.
Perform your program and report your results in a 1-page essay.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview a Personal Trainer or Strength and Conditioning Coach, asking for information
on their philosophy of weight training. Be sure to request information about
individualized programs, goals, and success rates. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Visit a local fitness center and observe the use of free weights vs. machines. Observe the
type of workout each gender is doing. Report your findings to the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fleck, Steven and Kraemer, William. Designing Resistance Training Programs. 4th Edition.
Human Kinetics, 2014.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. a.) Athletic Apparel b.) Athletic Shoes

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela

Created/Revised by: Mario Vela
Date: 12/10/2012

