BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
LATN 2 - Second Semester Latin
Prerequisite(s): LATN 1 with a grade of "C" or higher, or one year of high school
Latin
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course emphasizes an extended knowledge of Latin pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar, and
syntax, especially forms of the verb in the indicative mood. This course requires a study of the Latin
linguistic influence on the English language. Critical discussions on aspects of Roman civilization
relevant to Latin readings will provide a cultural background with which students can assess the
Roman contribution to modern society. Students who have completed at least two, but fewer than
three years of high school Latin (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the
present date should register for Third Semester Latin.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Pronounce Latin correctly.
B. Translate Latin sentences in the indicative and imperative forms.
C. Speak basic Latin at the intermediary level.
D. Write Latin at the intermediary level: use verbs in past, present, and future indicative tenses
(active and passive voice); use nouns from all five declensions; use common personal and
demonstrative pronouns.
E. Recognize Latin words in both colloquial and technical English, therefore expanding their
vocabulary.
F. Compare and contrast Roman history and culture to contemporary society and culture.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion on Roman Culture shall be infused throughout the course: Family and Daily
Life, Politics, Education, Greek Influence (especially in philosophy and education), Economy,
Contemporary Influence, and Legacy.
Lecture
Topics
1.
Relative Pronoun and Relative Clauses.
2.
Numerals: Expressions of Time.
3.
Expressions of Place, Locative Case.
4.
Fourth Declension.
5.
Fifth Declension.
6.
Uses of the Ablative Case.
7.
Irregular Adjectives (alter, uter)
8.
Comparison of Adjectives.
9.
Comparison of Adverbs.
10. Verbs: Perfect stems.

Hours
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
6.00
2.00
4.50
4.50
5.00

11. Imperfect and Perfect tenses.
12. Pluperfect Active Tense.
13. Future Active tense.
14. Future Perfect Active Tense.
15. Present Active Participle.
16. Perfect Passive Participle.
17. Passive Voice in the Perfect System.
18. Passive Voice in the Present System.
19. Pronunciation.
Total Hours

5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.50
3.50
4.00
4.00
2.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Review of homework.
G. Reading aloud for correct diction and translating Latin passages from the textbook or primary
sources.
H. Critical discussions of Roman language and culture.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written tests.
B. Diction exercises and test (in class or through digital media).
C. Homework exercises.
D. Class participation which includes discussions and group work.
E. Comprehensive mid-term test.
F. Comprehensive final test.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. 1. Read the essay on Roman politics on pages 15-16 in the textbook. Answer the
following questions based on what you learn in the essay:
2. What is the origin of the word 'fascist'?
3. When the Italian dictator Mussolini called his party the fascists, what historical
connections was he making?
B. Writing Assignments
1. 1. Read the story about travel in the Roman Empire on page 15 of the textbook; translate
the story and answer the comprehension questions at the end of the story.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. 1. Read the text and listen to the recording of the Latin story provided by the instructor.
2. Recite the story several times, listening and articulating carefully to perfect your Latin
diction.
3. Then record your recitation on the course web site or as a voice mail.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. M. Baume and J. Morwood. Oxford Latin Course. Part II . 2nd Edition. Oxford University
Press, 1997.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. QuickStudy Latin Grammar, ed. Liliane Arnet. BarCharts, Inc., 2001.
B. Audio, visual, textual, and interactive content and exercises on the Internet.
C. Computer Software: 1) Latina 4.5 (both vocabulary and 'flash' drills) Centaur Systems Ltd 407
N Brearly Street Madison, WI 53703-1603 Demonstration software available from:
www.centaursystems.com

Created/Revised by: Daniel Griggs
Date: 11/29/2010

