BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
LATN 1 - First Semester Latin
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

A translation course in elementary Latin, emphasizing a foundational knowledge of Latin
pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar, and syntax. Close study of the Latin linguistic influence on the
English language. Critical discussions on the aspects of Roman civilization relevant to the Latin
readings will provide the cultural background with which the student can assess the Roman
contribution to modern society. Students who have completed at least one, but fewer than two years of
high school Latin (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present date,
should register for Second Semester Latin.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Recall and pronounce correctly a basic Latin vocabulary.
B. Understand and translate basic Latin at the introductory level.
C. Compose Latin sentences and narratives at the introductory level. This includes using nouns and
adjectives of the First, Second, and Third Declension in all six cases, as well as conjugating
verbs in the present, active, and indicative.
D. Orally communicate simple, indicative Latin sentences.
E. Formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition.
F. Appraise elements of Roman culture and their influence on contemporary society.
G. Compose Latin sentences and narratives at the introductory level. This includes using nouns and
adjectives of the First, Second, and Third Declension in all six cases, as well as conjugating
verbs in the present, active and indicative.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Origins and Characteristics of the Latin Language, Pronunciation.
2. General Grammar: Sentence Structure, Parts of Speech.
3. First and Second Declension Nouns, Vocative Case, Gender and Number.
4. Noun and Adjective Cases: Nominative (subjects), Genitive (possession),
Dative (indirect objects), Accusative (direct objects), Ablative (with
prepositions).
5. Noun and Adjective Agreement (gender, number, case).
6. Prepositions.
7. Verbs: 1st, 2nd and 3rd Person, Singular and Plural, Infinitives.
8. Verbs: The Four Regular Conjugations, Third Conjugation I-Stems.
9. Third Declension Nouns and Adjectives.
10. Verbs: Imperative Active.

Hours
3.00
1.00
5.00
10.00

7.00
2.00
3.00
5.00
7.00
2.00

11. Neuter Nouns and Adjectives.
12. Adverbs and Question Words (Interrogatives).
13. Irregular Verbs: sum, possum, eo, volo.
14. Subordinate Clauses, Relative Pronouns (qui, quae, quod).
15. Demonstrative Pronouns: is, ille, hic, Personal and Reflexive Pronouns,
Possessive Adjectives.
16. Roman Culture: Origins, Religion, Myths, Architecture, Daily Life, Social
Structures, Influence and Legacy.
Total Hours

4.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
8.00
4.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Pronunciation exercises, reading aloud for correct Latin diction
H. Written translation of Latin passages from the textbook or source texts
I. Review of homework
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Written Examinations
C. Diction practicum
D. Comprehensive mid-term test
E. Comprehensive final test
F. Homework exercises, reading aloud, and translations from the textbook
G. Vocabulary, spelling, and grammar homework
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. M. Baume and J. Morwood. Oxford Latin Course, Part I. 2 Edition. Oxford University Press,
1996.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Computer Software: 1)Latina 4.5 (Latin Flash Drill & Latin vocab Drill for the Oxford Latin
course) Centaur Systems Ltd 407 N Brearly Street Madison, WI 53703-1603. Downloads
available from: www.centaursystems.com
B. Computer Software: SCRIBA 1.0, John Gruber-Miller, Classics Cornell College, 600 First
Street, W Mt. Vernon, IA 52314 Downloads available from:
http://www.cornellcollege.edu/Classical_Studies/scriba/zip.shtml.
C. Audio, visual, text sources and exercises on the Internet.
D. Quick Study Latin Grammar,ed. Lilane Arnet, BarCharts, Inc., 2001.

Created/Revised by: Daniel Griggs
Date: 02/22/2010

