BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
LIS 126 - Library and Research Skills
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to recognizing and using a variety of information resources and
formats for research and lifelong learning. Students will be introduced to Butte College information
resources, with emphasis on, but not limited to Library resources. Students will learn basic techniques
and tools for finding and evaluating information in libraries, the campus community, and the World
Wide Web. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Distinguish between Library resources and other Butte College online resources and access
services available via the Butte College Library web site.
B. Identify Library and other resources for finding and developing a topic.
C. Explain the nature and life cycle of information and distinguish between the types of material
found in various information sources (books, journals, newspapers, web, etc.)
D. Use basic search techniques to acquire information from online resources.
E. Identify the types of information that can and cannot be found on the Internet.
F. Employ effective information management strategies to track, save, and share digitally accessed
information.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Butte College and Butte College library services and
materials (overview)
2. Overview of the research process
3. Library resources for finding and developing a topic
4. The life-cycle of information
5. Introduction to library periodical & reference databases
6. Basic research using the World Wide Web
7. Tools and techniques for saving, organizing and managing research
8. Evaluating resources and refining research
9. Plagiarism, copyright (review) and citation
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work

Hours
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.50
1.50
2.50
2.50
17.00

D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Demonstration
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Select a topic in the Library SIRS database as demonstrated by the instructor. Read the
topic overview and opposing viewpoints.
2. Read the Butte College Library’s online tutorial on Finding and Developing a Topic. What
are the steps to finding and developing a topic?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a brief (one page) summary comparing and contrasting the types of information
sources available in the SIRS database with the types of information sources found in Gale
Virtual Reference Library.
2. Based on the topic you selected in SIRS, provide written responses to the following
prompts: In two to three sentences, summarize the key issues related to this topic. Give
author, title, source, and publication information for one magazine article on your topic,
one newspaper article on your topic, and one other source of any type.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Bring evidence of completion of one CAS workshop that will assist you in your college
career. Describe to your classmates the content of this workshop and how it will be useful
to you.
2. Visit the Butte College student service or student resource location that you selected from
those discussed in class. Give a short (5 minutes or less) presentation to your classmates
about this service, including location, hours,and what benefits it has for students.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Butte College Library electronic & online resources
B. Butte College Library online tutorials and workshops
C. Other online resources, such as: UC Berkeley Library Online Tutorials; Galeschools Research
Tools; Purdue Online Writing Project (OWL) and others TBD as appropriate

Created/Revised by: Shirleigh Brannon
Date: 04/16/2012

