BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
LIS 11 - Research Strategies
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course is intended for students wishing to improve their information reasearch skills. Students
will develop their abilities to locate, interpret, analyze, synthesize, evaluate and communicate
information effectively. Students will learn how to identify and define the scope of a research topic
and how to effectively research relevant online catalogs, electronic databases and the World Wide
Web.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and access a variety of library information services, including academic, public, and
Internet libraries.
B. Find and retrieve information resources in a variety of formats.
C. Evaluate information for currency, accuracy, relevance and credibility.
D. Present information in a variety of ways, including formal and informal essays, papers,
demonstrations, individual and group presentations, exams, written reviews, and notes.
E. Formulate research topics, identify relevant information sources, and cite sources following
accepted citation styles.
F. Recognize plagiarism and avoid plagiarism in their own work.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Libraries, Materials and Services
2.
The Research Topic
3.
Information Life Cycle
4.
Searching Library Databases
5.
Evaluating Credibility
6.
Searching the Internet
7.
Specialty Research Sources
8.
Plagiarism, Copyright, and Citation
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
3.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture

D. Demonstrations
E. Practical exercises
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Final Project
E. Individual presentations
F. Group presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and take at least one page of notes on the Cornell University online tutorial on
"Critically Analyzing Information Sources." Be prepared to share a summary of new
information you gained from this tutorial with your work group.
2. Print a copy of the UC Berkeley Internet Web Credibility Evaluation Checklist. Following
the criteria on the checklist, evaluate each of the web sites you are using in your research.
Submit your evaluations to the instructor and be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create an annotated bibliography of sources for your research paper, using either MLA or
APA citation style as appropriate. In your annotations, include a one paragraph
commentary on the main argument or focus of each resource, and a five sentence
summary of how the resource can help a reader understand key issues related to your
topic.
2. Write a 2-3 page paper on a topic of your choice. Include information from at least one
book, one web site, and two scholarly journal articles from the Library's online databases
in your research. Use in-text citations and a Works Cited/References page in APA or
MLA style.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete the Butte College Library's online “Research Paper Learning Module," taking
notes. For each section of the module, write a one page summary (in your own words) of
the key points presented in the module and describe how you can use this information to
help you write your paper.
2. Visit a library (other than the Butte College Library) in your community. This may be
either a local public library or the CSUC Meriam Library. Gather information about the
Library's hours and what kinds of information about local history can be found in the
library. Take notes or bring back examples of any guides to help you use the Library for
local history, plus any questions you had. You will use these notes to give a 2-5 minute
presentation to the class, including an overview of the library's offerings, insights you
gained, and what you found of most value from your visit.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Materials to be provided by the instructor

Created/Revised by: Shirleigh Brannon
Date: 02/03/2014

