BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
LM 40 - Life Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces the psychological, physiological and social principles needed to achieve
personal success in college, relationships, the world of work and life. Students explore how life
management strategies positively impact management of one’s goals, time, finances, stress and
personal wellness; and learn to employ strategies for college success and lifelong learning by
identifying one’s learning style, personality types, values, attitudes, skills and motivation.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Articulate an integrated approach to proactive wellness that stresses the interrelationship of the
physical self, the emotional/relational self, and the self as a part of the larger society and culture.
B. Analyze personal responsibility for choices, motivations, self-management, interdependence,
self-awareness, and emotional intelligence.
C. Utilize a systems approach to define existing goals and formulate new goals for lifelong
psychological, physiological and social growth, reflecting identified personal values and
standards.
D. Identify and apply skills related to health, time, financial, resource, stress, and personal life
management.
E. Assess her/his unique contribution to society, the workforce, and interpersonal relationships
through in-depth personal evaluation and assessment.
F. Describe and evaluate the structure and goals of higher education, including engaging in critical
thinking, interacting with diverse perspectives, developing deepened awareness and thought
processes, and realizing one's potential.
G. Identify and analyze paradigms related to human behavior, gender, health, physiological and
psychological wellness, learning, values, decision making, communication, leadership, and
lifelong learning.
H. Implement effective strategies for academic success including learning styles for improving
memory and retention.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Life Management:

Hours
6.00

Introduction to Human Development
Integration of the Physiological, Social and Psychological
Young Adult Development
Intentional Growth across the Lifespan
Assessing Attitudes
2. Individual Growth and Process:

10.00

2. Individual Growth and Process:

10.00

Your Sense of Self: Cognitive, Physical, Emotional/Relational
Career Interests and Development
The Clifton Strengths Finder / StrengthsQuest
Your Personality and Relationships
Analyzing Group Involvements, Supports Systems, Social Roles
Physiological and Emotional Wellness: Positive Fitness and
Nutritional Choices, Health and Wellness Across the Lifespan
3. Learning, Skills, Motivation:

7.00

Motivation and Motivated Skills
Learning Styles
Multiple Intelligences
Study Skills and Strategies
The Structure of Higher Education
4. Values, Standards, Morality:

5.00

Emotional Intelligence
Moral Development
Character Traits
Values: The Individual in Society
Ethical Decision Making
5. Decision Making and Problem Solving for Effective Life Management:

12.00

Goal Setting - Concepts and Strategies
Intentional Growth Planning
Time Management - Concepts and Strategies
Stress and Fatigue Management:Physical and Emotional Symptoms,
Responses and Repercussions; Burn-out and Disease Prevention:
Interrelationship of the Physical, Emotional, Cognitive; Implications
for Substances Dependency
Balancing work, family, leisure, and fitness issues
Financial Management and Consumerism
Resources Management
Living Sustainably
6. Interpersonal Communication:

5.00

Communication Styles
Listening and Attending Skills
Feedback: Skills for Giving and Receiving Appropriate Feedback
Physical Presentation as Communication and Cultural Statement
7. Leadership Development and Management Concepts:

3.00

Types of Power and the Implications for Social Structures
Qualities of Outstanding Leaders and Managers
Group Decision Making and Problem Solving
Transferable Leadership Skills
Mentoring
8. Looking Back and Looking Ahead:

3.00

8. Looking Back and Looking Ahead:
Personal Mission Statement: an Integrated Picture
Articulation of values and Goals related to One's Physical Self,
Psychological Self, and Self in Society
Aging, Death and Dying - Implications for Lifelong Wellness,
Intentional Growth, and Support and Connection
Reflection and Application
Total Hours

3.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Guided Reflection/Journaling
I. Inventories and personal reflection
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Journal
C. Group Participation
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the material in the On Course text on the “Eight Choices of Successful Students.” Be
prepared to discuss what success means to you, and choices you can make to live your life
with intentionality and purpose.
2. Read the Clifton Strengths Finder Themes and complete a worksheet identifying your 5
signature Strengths (definition and description), what they enable/empower you to do, and
when/where you have used them with success.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 5-7 page paper that reflects upon your self-discovery and intentional growth from
personal awareness gained over the semester, addressing at least five specific topics
covered in the course.
2. Write a one page mission statement that reflects your personal awareness, values and
legacy.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a Butte College Student Services program to research the services and approaches it
offers to guide student success. Be prepared to report your findings to the class.
2. Develop an individualized learning plan based on assessments which identifies your
unique preferences for learning and specific strategies for implementation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:

A. Skip Downing. On Course. Houghton-Mifflin, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Life Management materials packet to be purchased through the bookstore.
B. The Clifton Strengths Finder personal assessment (materials fee purchase)

Created/Revised by: Jo Anne Cripe
Date: 02/25/2013

