BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 26 - College Algebra
Prerequisite(s): MATH 124 or Math Level V
Recommended Prep: Two years high school algebra and Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course covers advanced algebra concepts beyond the scope of Intermediate Algebra. The topics
include algebraic simplifying, conics, theory and solution of equations and inequalities, systems of
equations, linear functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, polynomial and rational functions,
binomial expansion and partial fractions. The course is specifically designed for preparation for first
semester Calculus (MATH 30).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate proficiency solving polynomial, rational, radical, logarithmic, and exponential
equations, and polynomial inequalities.
B. Demonstrate proficiency performing the four basic operations on real and complex numbers,
polynomials, functions, rational expressions, and radical expressions.
C. Graph linear, quadratic, polynomial, and rational equations, and the conics, showing all
asymptotes when appropriate and applying polynomial theory when necessary.
D. Expand binomials using the Binomial Expansion Formula and perform partial fraction
decomposition.
E. Solve a variety of linear and non-linear systems of equations.
F. Solve applications using linear and quadratic equations, conic sections, and logarithms.
G. Demonstrate proficiency factoring polynomials into irreducible form.
H. Demonstrate proficiency evaluating, graphing, and finding the domain, range and inverse of a
wide variety of functions including, but not limited to, exponential, logarithmic, and piece-wise
functions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Expressions
- Including binomial expansion and partial fractions
2. Graphing Equations
- Including lines and conics
3. Functions
4. Solving Equations
5. Logarithms and Exponents
6. Systems of Equations
7. Polynomials
- Including finding zeros and graphing
Total Hours

Hours
12.00
12.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
5.00
9.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class Assignments and Class Response
D. Daily Homework Assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving
skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on Transformations and be able to graph functions whose
equations can be derived by transforming one of the six basic functions: y = x, y =|x|, y =
x^2, y = x^3, y = sqrt(x), and y = 1/x.
2. Read the section in the textbook on Partial Fraction Decomposition and be able to break
down a rational expression into a sum of simpler rational expressions that have either
constant numerators, or numerators that are linear expressions of the form Ax + B.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Explain the procedure to follow for identifying holes and asymptotes of the graph of a
rational function. Be sure to discuss how to tell if a zero of the denominator of a rational
function - call it C - is the x-coordinate of a hole, or if the equation x = C is the equation
of a vertical asymptote. Assume you are explaining this to a group of students hearing this
for the first time and write a detailed explanation.
2. Given a polynomial function of degree n, explain the procedure to follow for finding its
zeros. Be sure to discuss the relationship between the zeros and the x-intercepts of the
function, as well as how to tell if the graph of the function crosses the x-axis or simply
touches it. Further, explain how the Leading Coefficient Test can be used to describe the
behavior of the function as x approaches infinity from both the left and the right.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the section on Transformations and do the problems assigned by the instructor,
showing your work.
2. Review the section on Parabolas and do the problems assigned by the instructor, show all
your work.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cabral, T. College Algebra. 1st Edition. Butte College, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Scientific calculator or graphing calculator without symbolic algebra capabilities

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe
Date: 09/10/2012

