BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 32 - Analytic Geometry and Calculus III
Prerequisite(s): MATH 31
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

Vector valued functions, calculus of functions of more than one variable, partial derivatives, multiple
integration, Green’s Theorem, Stokes’ Theorem, divergence theorem. (C-ID MATH 230).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Perform vector operations.
B. Determine equations of lines and planes.
C. Find the limit of a function at a point.
D. Evaluate derivatives.
E. Write the equation of a tangent plane at a point.
F. Determine differentiability.
G. Find local extrema and test for saddle points.
H. Solve constraint problems using Lagrange multipliers.
I. Compute arc length.
J. Find the divergence and curl of a vector field.
K. Evaluate two and three dimensional integrals.
L. Apply Green's, Stokes', and divergence theorems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Vectors and vector operations in two and three dimensions
2. Vector and parametric equations of lines and planes and rectangular
equation of a plane
3. Dot, cross, and triple products and projections
4. Differentiability and differentiation including partial derivatives, chain rule,
higher-order derivatives, directional derivatives, and the gradient
5. Arc length and curvature; tangent, normal, binormal vectors
6. Vector-valued functions and their derivatives and integrals; finding velocity
and acceleration
7. Real-valued functions of several variables, level curves and surfaces
8. Limits, continuity, and properties of limits and continuity
9. Local and global maxima and minima extrema, saddle points, and Lagrange
multipliers
10. Vector fields including the gradient vector field and conservative fields
11. Double and triple integrals

Hours
5.50
4.50
4.00
7.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
2.00
6.00

12. Applications of multiple integration such as area, volume, center of mass, or
moments of inertia
13. Change of variables theorem
14. Integrals in polar, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates
15. Line and surface integrals including parametrically defined surfaces
16. Integrals of real-valued functions over surface
17. Divergence and curl
18. Green's, Stokes', and divergence theorems
Total Hours

6.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class Assignments and Class Response
D. Daily Homework Assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving
skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the 1959 Reide lecture "The Two Cultures" by C.P. Snow and be prepared to
discuss Snow's main thesis in class.
2. Read any essay from Henry Petroski's "The Essential Engineer" and be prepared to give an
account of the essay to other members of your class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a short paper (2 - 4 pages) discussing C.P. Snow's 1959 Reide lecture "The Two
Cultures" and discuss whether or not this lecture is still relevant over 50 years later.
2. Write a brief paper (1 - 2 pages) on why you decided on your major, what you expect from
your college education, and how Math 32 fits into your plan.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Find an example of multivariate calculus that is used in your major and be prepared to
show it in class.
2. Interview someone who has a job in your major and be prepared to share how with the
class how calculus is applied in this field.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Larsen, R.,& Edwards, B.H. Multivariable Calculus. 9th Edition. Brooks/Cole Cengage
Learning, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe
Date: 04/01/2013

