BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 7 - Formal Logic and Writing
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course develops an understanding of the relationship of language to logic, which should lead to
the ability to analyze, criticize, and advocate ideas and to reason inductively and deductively. Skills
will be developed through writing as well as the formal symbolic representation of arguments.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Recognize and analyze both inductive and deductive arguments.
B. Translate standard English arguments into symbolic form in order to evaluate their soundness
and/or cogency.
C. Recognize and analyze basic fallacious arguments: ad hominem and denying the antecedent.
D. Set up and use truth tables in order to assess validity of an argument.
E. Use conditional and indirect proofs when analyzing an argument.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Induction and Deduction
2.
Truth, Validity and Soundness
3.
Sentential Logic
4.
Truth Tables
5.
Proofs
6.
Fallacies
7.
Predicate Logic
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
4.00
8.00
4.00
11.00
6.00
12.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Written essays (6000-8000 word writing requirement)

D. Daily Homework Assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving
skills
E. Class Assignments and Class Response
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the "Note on the History of Logic" in your book. Be prepared to take a short quiz on
the material in class.
2. Read at least six biographical vignettes of prominent logicians that are in your book. Try
to select at least two from each period: Ancient Greek, Middle Ages, and Modern.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Pick an eminent logician from the many mentioned in the book and find out more about
him/her. Write a two-page paper on why this logician appeals to you.
2. Read the essay "Corn-pone" by Mark Twain and write a 3 to 4 page paper on whether this
essay is still relevant in the 21st century.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Collect an article that is in the news and try to symbolize the contents. Letters to the editor
are often good for this assignment.
2. Interview a family member and find out if they ever made an important decision based
solely on rational logic.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hurley, P.J. A Concise Introduction to Logic. 11th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe
Date: 09/10/2012

