BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 110 - Geometry
Prerequisite(s): MATH 108 or Math Level IV
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course covers selected topics in geometry. The topics include congruence, similarity, parallelism,
proofs, constructions, the perimeter, area and volume of geometric figures, and an introduction to right
triangle trigonometry.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate geometric reasoning skills and constructing skills, including the use of geometric
tools such as rulers, protractors and compasses.
B. Calculate measurements of angles, lengths, areas and volumes of a variety of geometric figures
in one, two and three dimensions.
C. Demonstrate proficiency in using geometric definitions, postulates, and theorems in proving
properties related to parallel lines, triangle congruency and similarity, quadrilaterals and circles.
D. Demonstrate proficiency in understanding and implementing theorems, basic algebra, geometric
rules, formulas and procedures in solving a variety of geometric problems.
E. Use geometry and its applications for everyday mathematical problems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Geometric Shapes and Measurement
2.
Perimeter, Area and Volume
3.
Reasoning and Triangle Congruence
4.
Parallel Lines and Quadrilaterals
5.
Similarity
6.
Circles
7.
Coordinate Geometry
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
7.00
8.00
7.00
8.00
7.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class Assignments and Class Response
D. Daily Homework Assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on Proving Lines Parallel and be able to use all the
methods discussed in formal geometric proofs regarding parallel lines.
2. Read the section in the textbook on Congruent Triangles and be able to use multiple
methods for proving triangles congruent.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write one or two sentences explaining how to find corresponding angles when two
parallel lines are cut by a transversal.
2. Describe in words how you know that two triangles are congruent.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the section on Proving Lines Parallel and solve the problems assigned by the
instructor, showing each step.
2. Review the section in the textbook on Congruent Triangles and solve the problems
assigned by the instructor, showing each step.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Alexander, D.C., Koeberlein, G.M. Elementary Geometry For College Students. 5th Edition.
Brooks/Cole Cengage Learning, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Scientific calculator

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe
Date: 09/10/2012

