BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 217 - Pre-Algebra
Prerequisite(s): MATH 216 or Math Level II
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course introduces elements of algebra and reinforces skills needed for operations with real
numbers. The topics include operations on integers, fractions, mixed numbers and decimals, ratio,
proportion and percents, algebraic expressions and equations, measurement and geometry, exponents,
graphing linear equations in two variables, and a variety of applications.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Perform the four basic arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division with fractions, decimals, and integers.
B. Solve applications involving ratios, proportions, and percents and acquire proficiency in their
use.
C. Solve a variety of applications involving perimeter, area, and volume.
D. Evaluate, simplify, add, subtract, multiply and divide basic algebraic expressions.
E. Calculate with whole number exponents and basic square roots.
F. Translate English sentences into mathematical expressions and equations.
G. Solve linear equations and related applications.
H. Convert within and between the US and Metric systems of measurement.
I. Graph points and lines in the rectangular coordinate system.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Whole Numbers, Rounding, and Order of Operations
2. Integers
3. Introduction to Algebraic Expressions, Evaluating and Translating
4. Fractions
5. Simplifying Algebraic Expressions
6. Decimals
7. Ratio, Proportion, and Percents
8. Solving Equations and Problem Solving
9. Geometry and Measurement
10. Adding, Subtracting, Multiplying and Dividing Algebraic Expressions
11. Linear Equations in Two Variables and Graphing
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
7.00
4.00
8.00
8.00
5.00
5.00
8.00
6.00
7.00
6.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class Assignments and Class Response
D. Daily Homework Assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving
skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on Integers and be able to define integers, place integers
on a number line, and find the opposite and absolute value of an integer.
2. Read the section in the textbook on Solving Equations and be able to recognize when to
use the distributive property, addition property of equality, and multiplicative property of
equality.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Describe in words the process you would go through to solve the equation 5(2x+1)-7=28.
Assume you are teaching it to someone for the first time and write a detailed explanation.
2. Describe in words how to locate an accurate representation of the number -3 3/4 on a
number line. Assume you are teaching it to someone for the first time and write a detailed
explanation.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the section on solving equations and solve the problems in the Section Exercises
assigned by the instructor showing each step.
2. Review the section on Integers and solve the problems in the Section Exercises assigned
by the instructor.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Martin-Gay, E. Prealgebra & Introductory Algebra. 3rd Edition. Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. MyMathLab, a computer web-based learning system

Created/Revised by: Phoebe Hartt
Date: 02/22/2016

