BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 216 - Basic Math
Prerequisite(s): Math Level I
Recommended Prep: Reading Level II
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is designed to review operations of whole numbers and to develop concept and
computational skills with fractions, decimals, percents, prime factoring, exponents, limited use of
calculators, measurement, area, perimeter, and basic statistics.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Perform the four basic arithmetic operations on whole numbers, fractions and decimals.
B. Use a calculator to solve applications.
C. Solve problems with exponents.
D. Solve problems involving percent.
E. Factor a given composite number into prime factors.
F. Solve simple equations.
G. Use proper form in writing mathematical statements.
H. Find the mean, median and mode for a set of data.
I. Read graphs.
J. Find the perimeter and area of geometric shapes.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Whole numbers
2. Fractions
3. Decimals
4. Ratio and proportions
5. Percents
6. Measurement and Geometry
7. Statistics (Reading Graphs, Mean, Median, Mode)
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
12.00
8.00
6.00
8.00
8.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations

G. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Final Examination
E. Written Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on ratios and be able to describe how to write a ratio in
three forms.
2. Read the section in the textbook on whole numbers and be able to define whole numbers
and place whole numbers on a number line.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write in words the process for finding a common denominator. Assume you are teaching
it to someone for the first time and write a detailed description.
2. After finding the mean, median and mode for a set of data, choose the measure of central
tendency you think is most representative and write a sentence supporting your selection.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In your textbook, review the section on division of fractions and solve the problems in the
exercise set assigned by the instructor.
2. Review your ALEKS pie online and complete the problems from the two next sections.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Miller, O'Neill & Hyde. Basic College Mathematics. 3rd Edition. McGraw Hill, 2015.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. ALEKS computer program

Created/Revised by: Phoebe Hartt
Date: 02/22/2016

