BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 108 - Beginning Algebra
Prerequisite(s): MATH 217 or Math Level III
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course covers fundamental algebraic concepts and operations. The topics include operations with
positive and negative real numbers, solving linear, quadratic, and rational equations, applications of
linear equations, operations with polynomials, exponential and rational expressions, factoring,
graphing linear equations in two variables, and solving systems of linear equations.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Simplify algebraic expressions.
B. Solve linear, rational, and radical equations, linear inequalities, and some basic quadratic
equations.
C. Add, subtract, multiply, and divide real numbers, polynomials, rational expressions, and radical
expressions.
D. Graph linear equations in two variables and linear inequalities in one variable.
E. Factor quadratic and some higher order polynomials.
F. Solve systems of equations in two variables.
G. Solve a variety of applications by translating sentences into equations.
H. Simplify expressions involving integer exponents using properties of exponents.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Basics
2. Linear Equations and Inequalities in One Variable
3. Linear Equations and Inequalities in Two Variables
4. Systems of Linear Equations
5. Exponents and Polynomials
6. Factoring
7. Rational Expressions
8. Roots and Radicals
9. Quadratic Equations
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
10.00
9.00
4.00
9.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
4.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class Assignments and Class Response
D. Daily homework assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on Addition and Subtraction of Rational Expressions and
be able to define rational expressions, add rational expressions with the same
denominator, and find the least common denominator for two rational expressions with
unlike denominators.
2. Read the section in the textbook on The Elimination Method and be able to describe the
Elimination Method, solve a system of linear equations using this method, and explain
what happens when this method is used to solve a system of equations that consists of two
parallel lines.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Describe in words the role factoring plays in finding a least common denominator when
adding rational expressions. Assume you are assisting a fellow classmate who has
experienced difficulty with this concept.
2. Describe in words how you would use the addition property of equality in the Elimination
Method of solving a system of two linear equations and show an example to illustrate your
description.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the section on Addition and Subtraction of Rational Expressions and solve the
problems assigned by the instructor, showing your solving process.
2. Review the section on The Elimination Method and solve the problems assigned by the
instructor, showing your solving process.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. McKeague, C.P. Elementary Algebra. 9th Edition. Brooks/Cole Cengage Learning , 2012.

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe
Date: 09/10/2012

