BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 124 - Intermediate Algebra
Prerequisite(s): MATH 108 or Math Level IV
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: NT
85 hours Lecture

5 Unit(s)

This course builds on the concepts and skills learned in Elementary Algebra. The topics include
exponents and polynomials, rational and radical expressions and equations, linear and quadratic
equations and inequalities, functions, complex numbers, logarithms, and applications.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Acquire proficiency solving linear, quadratic, rational, and radical equations, and linear
inequalities.
B. Acquire proficiency performing the addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division on real
and complex numbers, polynomials, rational expressions, and radical expressions.
C. Graph linear, quadratic, and exponential equations in two variables, linear inequalities in one
variable, and the conics.
D. Acquire proficiency factoring quadratic and higher order polynomials.
E. Solve systems of equations in two and three variables.
F. Solve a variety of applications by translating sentences into equations.
G. Simplify expressions involving integer and rational exponents using properties of exponents.
H. Evaluate, determine the domain and range, graph, and find the inverse of a variety of functions
including, but not limited to, exponential and logarithmic functions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review of the basics
2. Equations and Inequalities in One Variable
3. Equations and Inequalities in Two Variables
4. Systems of Linear Equations
5. Exponents and Polynomials
6. Rational Expressions and Functions
7. Rational Exponents and Roots
8. Quadratic Functions
9. Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
10. Conic Sections
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
7.00
9.00
6.00
11.00
12.00
11.00
10.00
11.00
4.00
85.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class Assignments and Class Response
D. Daily Homework Assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on Finding Equation of a Line and be able to identify the
different given information about the line to be used in the slope-point equation for
obtaining the final form of the equation of the line.
2. Read the section in the textbook on Analysis of the Descriminant as part of the Quadratic
formula and be able to use the result to identify the types of solutions of a Quadratic
Equation.
B. Writing Assignments
1. If f(x)=3/x and g(x)=3x-4, explain how to find (f o g)(x) and what are the domains of the
initial two functions and the resulting one. Assume you are explaining this to a classmate
having trouble and write a detailed explanation using a general approach to composite
functions as well as giving one specific example of evaluation of the resulting function.
2. Graph the functions y=|x|, y=|x|+2, and y=|x+2|, find x-and y- intercepts for each graph.
Assume you are explaining this to a group of students hearing this for the first time and
write a detailed explanation discussing the difference between the given graphs and how
you can use the basic graph build the new one knowing the results of your work.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the section on Equations with Radicals and solve the problems assigned by the
instructor, showing all steps.
2. Review the section on Division of Polynomials and solve the problems assigned by the
instructor, showing all steps.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. McKeague, C.P. Intermediate Algebra. 8th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2008.
B. Lehmann, J. Intermediate Algebra. 4th Edition. Pearson, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Scientific calculator with logarithmic functions

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe
Date: 09/10/2012

