BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MATH 13 - Survey of Calculus
Prerequisite(s): MATH 124 or Math Level V
Recommended Prep: Two years high-school algebra and Reading Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

Presents a study of the techniques of calculus with emphasis placed on the application of these
concepts to business and management related problems. The applications of derivatives and integrals
of functions including polynomials, rational, exponential and logarithmic functions are studied This
course is offered only once each academic year. (C-ID MATH 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Find the derivatives of polynomial, rational, exponential, and logarithmic functions.
B. Find the derivatives of functions involving constants, sums, differences, products, quotients, and
the chain rule.
C. Sketch the graph of functions using horizontal and vertical asymptotes, intercepts, and first and
second derivatives to determine intervals where the function is increasing and decreasing,
maximum and minimum values, intervals of concavity and points of inflection.
D. Analyze the marginal cost, profit and revenue when given the appropriate function.
E. Determine maxima and minima in optimization problems using the derivative.
F. Use derivatives to find rates of change and tangent lines.
G. Use calculus to analyze revenue, cost, and profit.
H. Find definite and indefinite integrals by using the general integral formulas, integration by
substitution, and other integration techniques.
I. Use integration in business and economics applications.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Functions and their graphs, including exponential and logarithmic functions
2. Limits and intuitive limit definition of derivative
3. Increments, tangent lines, and rate of change
4. Rules of differentiation including sum, product, quotient, and the chain rule
5. Implicit differentiation
6. Applications of differentiation such as marginal analysis, optimization, and
curve sketching
7. Antiderivatives, indefinite and definite integrals
8. Multiple techniques of integration including substitution
9. Area between curves
10. Approximating definite integral as a sum
11. Applications of integration in business and economics

Hours
14.00
5.00
4.00
12.00
2.00
12.00
5.00
5.00
3.00
2.00
4.00

Total Hours

68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Board Work
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Daily Homework Assignments, where the student will demonstrate problem-solving skills
D. Class Assignments and Class Response
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the section in the textbook on limits and be able to find the limit of a function
graphically and algebraically by using properties of limits and analytic techniques.
2. Read the section in the textbook on antidifferentiation and be able to find the
antiderivative of a function, evaluate indefinite integrals using basic rules of
antidifferentiation and use initial conditions to determine an antiderivative.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Describe in words how to find the limit as x approaches 2 for the function 3x - 4. Assume
you are teaching it to someone for the first time and write a detailed explanation.
2. Describe in words the process you would go through to evaluate the indefinite integral of
x^6 dx. Assume you are explaining it to someone in the class who is having trouble and
write a detailed explanation.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the section in the textbook on limits and do the problems assigned by the
instructor, show each step.
2. Review the section in the textbook on antidifferentiation and do the problems assigned by
the instructor, showing each step.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bittinger, M.L., Ellenbogen, D.J. & Surgent, S.A. Calculus and Its Applications. 10th Edition.
Addison-Wesley Pearson, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Scientific calculator or graphing calculator without symbolic algebra capabilities

Created/Revised by: Laurie Kincheloe
Date: 04/01/2013

