BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MCS 32 - The African American
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

The course describes the cultural history of African Americans from the post Civil War period to the
present. The African American experience is described and conceptualized as a function of cultural
history and the adaptations made by African Americans in more contemporary contexts. The
culmination of the comprehensive and detailed history highlights the challenges and creative triumphs
of African Americans as indicated through action in social, political, economic, religious, and artistic
endeavors. Finally, this discussion demonstrates how African Americans have through the years
become a distinctive and vital part of the fabric of American culture.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. describe the historical background of African Americans as a contextual frame for
understanding contemporary conditions.
B. explain why social stratification or social class, which has become such an conspicuous part of
American society, constantly involves the dynamics of ethnic life, both internally and externally,
thereby requiring an inter-play of class and ethnic considerations.
C. evaluate the uniqueness of African American culture, by examining contributions to American
society as a whole.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Historical Background
2. Sociocultural Themes (family and community structures)
3. Political Economy
4. Education and Cultural/Linguistic Issues
5. Civil Rights and Integration
6. African American Contributions (law, politics, art, etc.)
7. Contemporary Issues
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
9.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Examinations
B. Student presentations (oral and written). Each student will write
a minimum of 2,500 words as part of his/her class requirement which
will be graded for grammar and content.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Harris, E. Lynn. Mama Dearest. Karen Hunter Publishing, 2009.
B. Massey, Brandan. Cornered. Kensington Books, 2009.
C. Silver, Murray, M. Daddy King and Me. Continental Shelf Publishing, 2008.
D. Walker, Alice. The Color Purple: Tenth Anniversary Edition. 10th Edition. Alice Walker, 1992.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 09/20/2010

