BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MSP 96 - Introduction to Computer Graphics
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the skills, techniques and tools to produce computer generated
graphics. Areas of study will include: the basics of computer drawing and design, adding text to
graphics, converting and exporting graphics into multiple formats for print and online, and
modification and transformation techniques.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify skills, techniques and tools needed to create computer graphics.
B. Produce computer graphics using the appropriate techniques and tools.
C. Identify and demonstrate the basic processes to modify digital artwork.
D. Identify the various effects that can be used to create and enhance graphic images.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Apple Computers
2. Graphic design and drawing software
3. Digital drawing basics
4. Adding text to graphics
5. Effects to enhance graphics images
6. Converting and exporting graphics into new formats
7. Modification techniques
8. Software evaluation
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.00
3.00
8.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Introduction to Apple Computers
2. Graphic design and drawing software
3. Digital drawing basics
4. Adding text to the graphics
5. Effects to enhance graphic images
6. Converting and exporting graphics into new formats
7. Modification techniques
8. Software evaluation

Hours
6.00
4.50
4.50
12.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Projects
E. Labs
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Creative Projects
C. Notebook evaluation
D. Lab Performance
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research a designer using the Internet and find an article or interview to discuss as an
oral report to the class.
2. Research a design firm from the list supplied by instructor, read the company's mission
statement, goals and processes for working with clients and share with class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research two new technologies related to the design industry. Write a one-page paper
describing the elements of the technology and how they relate to creating design projects.
2. Write a one-page bio on a designer or design studio chosen from the list supplied by
instructor. Include geographic location of designer or studio, number of employees, and
discuss the development of three projects created by the designer or studio.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research two video design tutorials on Youtube. Select one tutorial and create the project
shown in the tutorial. Show both the video and final project to the class.
2. Visit a local design studio. Interview the owner or an employee of the studio to share the
individual's background and skills with class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Tutorial Websites

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly
Date: 02/04/2013

