BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MSP 75 - Multimedia Production II
Prerequisite(s): MSP 74
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This is an intermediate course in multimedia production that focuses on the application of interactive
design techniques. Students will produce original content in the creation of multimedia projects.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply principles of multimedia design for creating multimedia presentations.
B. Demonstrate technical proficiency in the production of multimedia design presentations.
C. Complete advanced design projects working within guidelines and design constraints set by
clients.
D. Identify contemporary job markets in graphic multimedia industries, while developing
portfolio-related projects specific to obtaining employment in a design field.
E. Create original content for use in multimedia presentations, including video, audio and
photography.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Software used in the development of multimedia presentations
2. Developing a Multimedia Project
3. Principles of multimedia design
4. Interactivity
5. Working within guidelines and constraints for client projects
6. Developing a portfolio for industry-specific employment
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
8.00
6.00
10.00
4.00
4.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Software used in the development of multimedia presentations
2. Developing a Multimedia Project
3. Interactivity
4. Design and produce a portfolio
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
20.00
10.00
11.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Final Examination
C. Tests
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research and read about a multimedia design company on the Internet. Find three projects
created by the company and share with class.
2. Research and read about an individual multimedia designer on the Internet. Research their
education and past employment. Share with class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Develop a multimedia storyboard and describe in writing the animation and technical
processes that will be used to produce the project.
2. Search for an interview with the founder of a multimedia company, or an interview with a
specific designer. Write a one-page biography of the individual. Share with class in oral
report.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a local business, mall, or bank and locate a multimedia kiosk. Describe kiosk
operations and interface to class.
2. Visit a local gallery or online gallery that is currently showing a multimedia exhibit. Write
a critique of the exhibit and share with class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts
B. Periodicals
C. Instructional Videos

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly
Date: 02/04/2013

