BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MSP 9 - Concept Art and Design for Entertainment Media
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to visualization techniques, ideation processes, and the tools and
materials used in professional concept studios in the video game and entertainment industries.
Students will be introduced to the history of concept art and its evolution from industrial design and
architecture to modern day use in video games, entertainment, and toy design. Students will learn how
to develop concepts from the sketch phase through final presentation drawings, brainstorming and
teamwork, reading and adapting project briefs, and creating professional presentation boards. This is
an essential foundation course for programs and careers in concept art, video games, animation, digital
design, graphic design, and industrial design.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define the key developments, people, and milestones in the history of industrial design.
B. Discuss current trends, techniques, and careers for concept designers in video games,
entertainment, and toy design.
C. Analyze and write concept briefs and project proposals.
D. Evaluate and develop sketches and designs in a variety of media.
E. Develop orthographic production drawings and turnarounds.
F. Develop finished presentation drawings of the main subjects found in video games and
entertainment properties.
G. Develop level layouts, gameflow diagrams, and storyboards for cinematics.
H. Assemble a professional presentation portfolio.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. History of industrial design and concept art
2. Careers in video games and entertainment and industrial design
3. Concept art studio practices, communication, teamwork, and production
processes
4. Overview of entertainment media and concept requirements
5. Introduction to traditional and digital tools, materials, and processes
6. Basic sketching, design, and perspective
7. Orthographic views and production drawings
8. Character design
9. Creature design
10. Environment design
11. Level design

Hours
2.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

12. Vehicle, hardware, and weapons design
13. Storyboarding
14. Presentation skills and techniques
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
2.00
34.00
Lab

Topics
1. History of concept art, industrial design, and milestones in video games,
film, and television
2. Ideation processes, brainstorming, teamwork, and communication
3. Introduction to traditional tools, materials, and techniques
4. Introduction to digital tools, techniques, and workflow
5. Fundamentals of design, sketching, and visual thinking
6. Research and investigation
7. Basic drawing, sketching, composition, and perspective
8. Production and presentation drawings
9. Character and creature design
10. Vehicle, weapon, and hardware design
11. Environment design and architecture
12. Level layout
13. Storyboarding and gameflow
14. Presentation boards
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
5.00
5.00
2.00
3.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Class participation
C. Lab Projects
D. Written Assignments
E. Written or Oral Examinations
F. Critique
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read handouts 1-3 on the history and evolution of concept art, industrial design, and
current trends. Be prepared to discuss similarities and differences across the various

disciplines
2. Read Chapter 2 of Steur and Eissen's "Sketching: The Basics" on Drawing Approach. Be
prepared to discuss perspective, viewpoint, and case examples and to draw basic forms in
perspective.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select an artist, designer, or intellectual property from the Resources handout and write a
2-3 page report on your chosen subject. Your report should include examples of major
works or milestones, impacts, influences, and your impressions. Cite all sources used.
2. Using one of the case briefs, analyze, brainstorm, and design an alternate property. Write a
one page proposal defining high concept, risks, assets, competition, and strategic
advantages.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Based on your "Genesis Mashup" rolls, brainstorm and develop a set of production
drawings for your character, environment, vehicle, or weapon. Make sure you utilize the
full ideation process and follow through to a presentation board of your project.
2. Watch the "Metropolis" DVD (individually or in groups) and brainstorm and develop a set
of production drawings for a re-imagined "False Maria" robot. Make sure you utilize the
full ideation process and follow through to a presentation board of your project. Also
include a style research and inspiration board.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. A.Steur, R. & Eissen, K. Sketching: The Basics. 1st Edition. BIS Publishers, 2011.
B. B.Tsai, Francis. 100 Ways to Create Fantasy Figures. 1st Edition. Impact, 2008.
C. C.Alexander, Rob. Drawing and Painting Fantasy Landscapes and Cityscapes. 1st Edition.
Barron's Educational Series, 2006.

Created/Revised by: John Trolinger
Date: 10/24/2011

