BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MSP 68 - T-Shirt Design and Promotional Products
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

In this course students will develop digital art, illustration and graphic design projects for transfer to
t-shirts, mugs and other promotional items. The students will work with media, conceptualization of
ideas, collaboration, Photoshop, Illustrator, reproduction and production techniques. Students will be
required to conduct research and identify target markets.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze and critique graphics projects for promotional items including t-shirts.
B. Develop a portfolio of work created in the class.
C. Create a final printed mural or super graphics output.
D. Use proper design pinciples to create specific graphics projects.
E. Describe the theory and practice of project management and production techniques in relation to
promotional and entrepreneurial projects.
F. Research and identify target markets.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
a. Introduction to class
b. Basic Apple Macintosh computer use
c. Explanation of projects and expectations
2. T-shirt, textile and promotional graphics
a. Presentations of digital and public art
b. View case studies of design projects and the Direct-to-Garment industry
c. Examine industry practices in t-shirt design and creation
3. Research and Design
a. Learn basic tools: Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator
4. Small Business and Client Analysis
a. Research and define the various Direct-to-Garment business types that can
be developed
b. Customer need and target market.
5. Digital Printing and Output
a. Study inkjet, laser, traditional, and alternative production techniques
b. Examine printing options for output of specific projects
c. Examine options for display and sales of designed and produced products
6. Design Development and Production

Hours
2.00

12.00

5.00
3.00

4.00

6.00

6. Design Development and Production
a. Create first and final comps of design projects
b. Begin output of the projects
7. Final Critique
a. Discussion and critique of final projects
Total Hours

6.00

2.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Introduction
a. Introduction to class
b. Basic Apple Macintosh computer use
c. Explanation of projects and expectations
2. T-shirt, textile and promotional Graphics
a. Presentations of digital and public art
b. View case studies of design projects and the Direct-to Garment industry
c. Examine industry practices in t-shirt design and creation
3. Research and Design
a. Learn basic tools: Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator
b. Research designers and studios creating t-shirts and Direct-to Garment
products
4. Small Business and client Analysis
a. Research and define the various Direct-to-Garment business types that
can be developed
b. Customer needs and target market
5. Digital Printing and Output
a. Study inkjet, laser, traditional, and alternative production techniques
b. Examine printing options for output of specific projects
c. Examine options for display and sales of designed and produced products
6. Design Development and Production
a. Create first and final comps of design projects
b. Begin output of the projects
7. Final Critique
a. Discussion and critique of final projects
Total Hours

Hours
6.00

10.00

14.00

5.00

6.00

9.00

1.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Group Discussions
C. Field Trips
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Hands-on production
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects

C. Demonstration
D. Lab Projects
E. Final Examination
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research and read about a t-shirt design company or freelance clothing designer. Be
prepared to discuss and share this project with the class.
2. Research and read about alternative design techniques and how they may be implemented
in specific projects. Share with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. write a one page paper addressing the needs and entry to the Direct-to-Garment industry.
2. Write a company executive summary for a t-shirt design business. Use the supplied
summary as an example of how your summary should be written.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a local clothing store and take notes about the demographic audience that this store is
promoting to.
2. Use the internet to research three online clothing companies. Share with the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Sketchbook
B. USB Drive

Created/Revised by: Daniel Donnelly
Date: 02/04/2013

