BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MSP 30 - Introduction to Digital Art
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to fundamental concepts, practices, and theories of digital art
production. Topics include integration of traditional design, color, and compositional principles with
contemporary digital tools. (C-ID ARTS 250).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply the elements and principles of design in finished digital images and time-based works.
B. Create a portfolio of work demonstrating formal, conceptual, and technical development.
C. Produce digital images and time-based work through various digital media input and output
methods using vector or raster-based software.
D. Examine and describe contemporary approaches, language, aesthetics and emerging media in
digital art.
E. Safely handle and maintain digital imaging hardware and materials
F. Evaluate and critique digital images and time-based works utilizing relevant terminology and
concepts.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Elements and principles of design as they relate to digital media
2. Concept development as it relates to digital and time-based art
3. The use of technology to create art through various digital media input and
output methods
4. Principles and uses of vector and raster-based software in the creation of
digital art
5. Characteristics of color in additive and subtractive color systems
6. History, contemporary trends, language, aesthetics and emerging media as
they relate to digital art
7. Group and individual critiques of digital images utilizing relevant
terminology and concepts
Total Hours

Hours
4.50
4.50
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1.
Create art through various digital media input and output methods using
vector or raster-based software

Hours
17.00

2. Assignments focusing on the conceptual development in project-based
digital images and time-based works
3. Group and individual critiques in oral and written formats
Total Hours

17.00
17.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Critique
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Written Assignments
E. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research and read about a digital photographer or designer specializing in photo
manipulation. Be prepared to critique in class.
2. Read a magazine article supplied by the instructor on specialized photo manipulation
techniques. Demonstrate technique to class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a photoshop professional and write a one page biography on this individual.
Include artist's photographs in the biography.
2. Write a one page paper to incorporate into a magazine layout. Include visual elements
from the artist into the design.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research a beginning photoshop tutorial. Demonstrate the technique to the class.
2. Use the styrofoam letters supplied by the instructor to create a scene. Photograph this and
share with class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Arntson, Amy. Digital Design Basics. 1 Edition. Wadsworth Publishing, 2005.
B. London, Stone and Upton. A Short Course in Digital Photography. 1 Edition. Prentice Hall,
2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handout Materials
B. Reserve Library Books

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 10/20/2014

