BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 10 - Music Theory I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): MUS 11 and MUS 20, MUS 30 or MUS 40
Recommended Prep: MUS 3 or Ability to read and write music at a fundamental
level and Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course, through guided composition and analysis, incorporates the following concepts: rhythm
and meter; basic properties of sound; intervals; diatonic scales and triads; diatonic chords, basic
cadential formulas and phrase structure; dominant seventh; figured bass symbols; and non-harmonic
tones. Development of skills in handwritten notation is expected. Examples from, and discussion about
historical and social contexts will be integrated throughout the course. (C-ID MUS 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the cultural significance of various modes used in music cultures of the world.
B. Describe the history and evolution of music notation, including major theorists and historical
periods.
C. Write and identify all major and minor scales and key signatures.
D. Transpose a given melody to any specified key.
E. Construct any interval up to an octave above and below a given note.
F. Visually identify all intervals up to an octave.
G. Write and identify any triad in root position and inversion.
H. Identify simple and compound meters.
I. Identify cadence types, including perfect authentic, imperfect authentic, half, plagal, and
deceptive cadences.
J. Conduct harmonic analysis of diatonic chord progressions.
K. Identify phrases and periods in notated music.
L. Write four-part diatonic harmony.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Handwritten notation of pitch and rhythm and discussion of their historical
evolution.
2. Simple and compound meters with examples from great literature
3. Basic properties of sound
4. Intervals
5. Key signatures and their history
6. Diatonic scales and triads and Roman numeral analysis and history
7. Diatonic chords, basic cadential formulas and phrase structure and historical
evolution.
8. Dominant seventh

Hours
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00

9. Figured bass
10. Non-harmonic tones
11. Four-part chorale writing principles
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Assignments
B. Written Examinations
C. Composition Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Research the contributions made to Western music by Giovanni Da Palestrina, paying
special attention to his contributions to the Tonal Harmonic system we are studying, and
the historical significance of these contributions.
2. Using Grove's Encyclopedia of Music, research the development of the major/minor
system of music in Western Europe. Be prepared to discuss the results of your reading in
class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Attend a concert and prepare a 1500 word report on your experience, giving attention to as
many elements of music as you can identify and explain how they are used in the music
you heard. Discuss the historical period and culture in which the music was composed.
2. Create a chart of the chords and basic cadential formulas in every major and minor key up
5 sharps and flats.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using a given melody and bass line, harmonize while observing all applicable rules of
voice-leading, doubling, parallel and contrary motion.
2. Working with several of your classmates, take a Bach chorale and transpose it an
augmented fourth higher. Observe all rules of voice leading and range in your
reharmonization, and be prepared to defend your choices in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Turek, Ralph. Theory for Today's Musician. 1st Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2007.
B. William Duckworth. A Creative Approach to Music Fundamentals.. 11th Edition.
Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Music manuscript paper [8.5" X 11" Notation Paper (3 hole punched)]

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 12/07/2015

