BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 3 - Music Fundamentals
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

An introduction to the notation and primary elements of tonal music. Incorporates the following
concepts: staff notation in treble and bass clefs, rhythm and meter; basic properties of sound; intervals;
diatonic scales and triads; and diatonic chords. Development of skills in handwritten notation is
expected. (C-ID MUS 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Write and recognize in staff notation the elementary components of diatonic tonal music,
including pitch and rhythm.
B. Construct major and minor scales and key signatures; intervals up to the octave; and commonly
used diatonic triads and seventh chords.
C. Identify simple and compound meters; intervals up to the octave; major and minor key
signatures; and commonly used diatonic triads and seventh chords.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Handwritten notation of pitch and rhythm
2. Simple and compound meters
3. Basic properties of sound
4. Intervals
5. Key signatures
6. Diatonic major and minor scales
7. Diatonic chords
Total Hours

Hours
7.00
8.00
8.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments

D. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Select and research one of the six main elements of music and prepare a presentation for
the class on the results of your reading.
2. Read the chapter in your textbook about fundamental melodic and rhythmic concepts. To
practice your notational skills, transfer the end-of-chapter exercises to music staff notation
paper for the next class session.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a one page informative essay about your musical self. You will find a list of helpful
questions posted online that can help prompt your thoughts regarding your current music
knowledge.
2. Attend a live music concert and write a report (1,500 word minimum) describing the
performance. Properly utilize music terminology such as the elements of rhythm, melody,
harmony, timbre, and dynamics, and identify the names of the instruments used in the
performance. Proof of attendance must accompany your report.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Listen to a recorded performance of the following three compositions: First movement of
Beethoven's Symphony #5 in C minor; Maple Leaf Rag by Scott Joplin; Kashmir, as
performed by Led Zeppelin. Analyze each piece for its use of rhythm as a compositional
device. Be prepared to discuss your analysis in class.
2. Re-notate the song distributed in class on staff notation paper using pencil. Label the
rhythmic count and all pitches in each measure.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Duckworth, W. A Creative Approach to Music Fundamentals. 11th Edition. Schirmer/Cengage,
2013.
B. White, Gary C.. Music First!. 6th Edition. Brown and Benchmark, 2010.
C. Gerhold, John . A Plain English Guide to Music Fundamentals. 1st Edition. Kendall-Hunt, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Blank music staff paper

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

