BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 40 - Piano I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Selected by audition
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for the piano.
The focus of the course is on fundamentals: reading music, posture, hand position, fingering, rhythm,
chord structure and progressions, and performance. Emphasis is on the progressive development of
skills needed for solo performance. Achievement is evaluated through a juried performance. This
course is primarily intended for music majors.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Play with precise rhythm.
B. Play the correct pitches with accurate intonation.
C. Play with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied.
D. Play in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
F. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
G. Demonstrate appropriate of blend and balance when performing as an accompanist.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Keyboard basics: sitting, posture, hand position, the geography of the
keyboard
2. Introduction to piano music notation: the clefs, note time values, ties,
symbols
3. Scales and chords
Total Hours

Hours
2.50
4.00
2.00
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. Major five-finger patterns on white keys; triads
2. Major five-finger patterns on black keys
3. Minor five-finger patterns on white keys; triads; relative minor
4. Minor five-finger patterns on black keys; triplets
5. Chord qualities: augmented, diminished; dotted note values

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.50

6. Tetrachords and major scales; octaves; the damper pedal
7. Major scales, arpeggios; triads of the key
8. Chord inversions; triads in all positions
9. The dominant and dominant seventh chords
10. Primary chords in major keys: I-IV-V chord progressions
11. Tetrachords in minor scales; arpeggios
12. Primary chords in minor keys: I-IV-V chord progressions
13. Performance evaluation and analysis
Total Hours

4.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Individual instruction
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Class participation
D. Final Examination
E. Performance Examinations
F. In-class performance
G. Research paper or Concert report
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Go online and read a back issue of "Clavier" dealing with effective practicing techniques.
Be prepared to demonstrate in class.
2. Read in Grove's Encyclopedia of Music about a prominent piano performer. Be prepared
to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 1500 word research paper about the development of the piano keyboard action
and how this affected piano technique.
2. Attend a concert where the piano is the principal instrument or plays a substantial role in
the performance, and write a 2 page paper detailing your experience.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Listen to a CD where the piano is the principal instrument or plays a substantial role in the
performance. Be prepared to discuss the piano techniques used in class.
2. Practice assigned technique exercises a minimum of 6 hours per week.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Baker, K.. The Complete Piano Player. 2nd Edition. Amsco Publications, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:

A. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

