BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 22 - Guitar III
Prerequisite(s): MUS 21
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for the guitar
at an advanced intermediate level. The focus of the course is on building technique and repertoire.
Emphasis is on the progressive development of skills needed for solo performance. Achievement is
evaluated through a juried performance. This course is primarily intended for music majors. (C-ID
MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Play with precise rhythm at an advanced intermediate level.
B. Play the correct pitches with accurate intonation at an advanced intermediate level.
C. Play with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied at an advanced intermediate level.
D. Play in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing as an accompanist.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to 3/2 Bar Jazz Chord Progression, Scales, and Basic Rhythm
Charts
2. Introduction to Jazz Melody
3. Classical Guitar Notation and Explanation of Symbols
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
2.00
2.50
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. Bluegrass and Country Style Arranging
2. Description and Recognition of Rhythms
3. Introduction of Jazz Melody
4. Contemporary Style Concepts for Arranging
5. Rock and Blues Soloing and Improvisation
6. Arpeggio Style Arranging
7. Ear Training

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.50

8. Development of Final Projects
Total Hours

3.00
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Class Activities
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Demonstrations
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Reading and Analysis of Guitar Music Charts
F. Analysis of Recordings
G. Analysis of Individual Performance and Group Recitals
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Class participation
C. Final Examination
D. Written Assignments
E. Performance Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout biography of Andres Segovia and be prepared to discuss the technical
contributions that he made to guitar playing.
2. Go online and read several chapters of your choice from "Guitar Technique" by Hector
Quine. Be prepared to discuss what you learn in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Attend a concert of guitar music and write a 2-3 page report that reflects your
understanding of the skills/techniques in the performer's playing, as well as an analysis of
the musical style(s) present.
2. Write a 1500 word research paper about a prominent guitar manufacturer and focus on
how their improvements in the instrument facilitated playing.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Get together with fellow students and practice jamming together. Be prepared to
demonstrate what you have done in class.
2. Practice jazz technique on your instrument a minimum of 8 hours per week.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Mel Bay’s . Guitar Class Method,Vol.1. . Mel Bay Publishing, 1972.
B. Govan, Guthrie. Creative Guitar 2. 1st Edition. Music Sales America publisher, 2006.
C. Christiansen, M.. Fingerboard Theory for Guitar. 1st Edition. Mel Bay Publishing, Inc., 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Guitar - steel string or classical in playable condition
B. Capo and pick
C. Music staff paper

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

