BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 54 - Studio Recording I
Prerequisite(s): MUS 51 and MUS 52
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture
153 hours Lab

4 Unit(s)

This is a hands-on, project-based course in which students will apply learned methods and skills to a
studio recording session. Students will set up and record professional quality live music sessions.
Students will learn proper microphone technique and post-production mixing techniques. This course
will also cover setting up and managing Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) recording
equipment. Course will also cover Copyright and ethics of music ownership rights.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Manage and organize professional studio recording projects.
B. Mix a sound recording.
C. Export recording projects to CD and the Internet.
D. Set up and manage MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) recording equipment.
E. Set up, track and mix a live studio recording project.
F. Explain American copyright law and the ethics of music ownership rights.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Computer recording techniques, setup and applications.
2. Recording session set up.
3. Tools and tips for mastering an audio mix recording.
4. Methods of exporting the final audio product.
5. The MIDI studio: Equipment and recording procedures.
6. Copyright and ethics of music ownership rights.
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Set up for practice recording project, project overview and planning.
2. Students apply skills in microphone placement by setting up microphones
for a full band recording session. Students will learn standard microphone
placement technique, as well as creative application of microphone use and
placement.
3. Set up headphone mix.
4. Set up monitoring and mixing console.
5. Record scratch tracks and playback in various monitor arrangements.

Hours
4.00
10.00

4.00
4.00
10.00

6. Recording project 1. Students will apply all studio methods learned to a live
band studio recording. Students will set up band gear and microphones.
Students will perform and engineer the recording of an original song.
Students will work in a group to mix, master and export final version of
recording.
7. Recording project 2. Students will apply all studio methods learned to a live
band studio recording. Students will set up band gear and microphones.
Students will engineer the recording of an original song by a local/regional
band. Students will work in a group to mix, master and export final version
of recording. Students will gain experience in managing a recording session,
producing a band, and workflow/time management methods.
8. Listen and review projects.
Total Hours

58.00

58.00

5.00
153.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Written Examinations
C. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the instructor-assigned textbook as well as any course handouts.
2. Read the necessary reference material for the preparation of a paper about copyright law
in America.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a short paper on the history of copyright laws and the concept of fair use.
2. Write a short paper detailing your experience of visiting a commercial recording studio.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Work on individual recording projects in the recording studio.
2. Visit an area recording studio, and interview the staff and observe a recording session.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bartlett and Bartlett. Practical Recording Techniques. Fifth Edition. Focal Press, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 10/24/2011

