BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 7 - Jazz Appreciation
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is the study of jazz from its African origins to the various forms in which it exists today.
Emphasis is on historical and socio-economic factors in the development of jazz. The course includes
a stylistic analysis of jazz and its musical elements in order to develop musical awareness.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the six basic elements that inform all music and how these elements are
used in jazz.
B. Recognize and identify the major styles present in jazz, and the prominent performers
representative of the various styles.
C. Recognize and discuss the diversity and inter-relationship of various styles.
D. Explain the historical continuum and the socio-economic factors that helped shape jazz.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. An introduction to jazz.
2. The Sources of Jazz African origins, Ragtime and the Blues.
3. New Orleans Style: ODJB, King Oliver, and Louis Armstrong.
4. The Swing Style and the Swing Era: Fletcher Henderson; Duke Ellington;
Stride Piano; Count Basie and Lester Young; Benny Goodman;
Miscellaneous Big Bands of the Swing Period.
5. The Instrumental Singing Style of Billie Holiday.
6. The Bebop Revolution, the Bop Style and the Beginning of Modern Jazz:
Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Thelonius Monk.
7. The Cool Style: Dave Brubeck and Miles Davis.
8. The Funky/Hard-Bop Reaction to the Cool Style; The Return to the Roots;
Jazz, the Civil Rights Movement, and Black Nationalism.
9. Important Jazz Players of the 50’s: Sonny Rollins and John Coltrane: The
Two Principal Tenor Saxophone Soloists of the 1950-60s; Charles Mingus
and Bill Evans: Two Lonely Introverts—The Nature of their contributions
to jazz.
10. Women in Jazz: Past, Present, and Future.
11. Bossa Nova and Free Jazz Style.
12. Fusion (Jazz/Rock/Soul/Pop): Miles Davis.
13. The Contemporary Jazz Scene: Some questions concerning the taste,
aesthetic value, and the quality of American culture.

Hours
5.00
3.00
5.00
8.00

2.00
7.00
2.00
2.00
5.00

2.00
1.50
2.00
1.50

14. Jazz in Television and Motion Pictures.
15. The Future of Jazz; Jazz and the New Technology.
Total Hours

3.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Analysis of recorded music
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Homework
D. Final Examination
E. Three listening reports based on jazz recordings
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the instructor-assigned textbook as well as any course handouts.
2. Select a jazz musician and read a biography of that person and prepare a research paper.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a piece of music from three style periods and prepare a paper that both analyzes the
music in terms of its overall influence on the style in question, as well as the performance
of the musicians and any influence said performance may have had.
2. Select a jazz musician of interest to you and prepare a research paper.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Select a piece of music that interests you, listen to it and prepare a paper that analyzes the
music in terms of form, style and performance.
2. Attend a jazz concert and prepare a paper on your experience, including some research
into the composer and the performer(s), if possible.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Deveaux, S. & Giddins, G.. Jazz: Essential Listening. 1st Edition. W.W. Norton & Co., 2010.
B. Gioia, T.. The History of Jazz. 2nd Edition. Oxford University Press, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Related news articles and commentary from journals and websites
B. Video documentaries, recorded music
C. Compact disc accompanying music used in classroom lecture and discussion.
D. Recorded music for completion of the Listening Reports.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 10/24/2011

