BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 9 - World Music
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the music of non-Western cultures. The course examines the music of
a number of cultures including representative examples drawn from the traditions of Africa,
Southeastern Europe, Asia, and Latin America. Classical, folk and popular idioms are explored with
emphasis on how the various cultures influence the creation and performance of music.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the basic elements present in all music;
B. Discuss the role music plays in a number of non-Western cultures;
C. Correlate music examples with a specific culture;
D. Describe the similarities and differences in instruments from the cultures studied;
E. Discuss the current impact (if any) of Western popular music upon the music of the cultures
studied.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction: the basic elements of music
2. Africa: Ewe, Mande, Dagbamba, Shona, BaAka
3. Southeastern Europe: Bosnia, Bulgaria. Hungary
4. India: The classical music of South India; ragas and talas
5. Indonesia: Gamelan music of Java, Bali, North Sumatra
6. Japan and China
7. Latin America and the Caribbean
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
9.00
3.00
12.00
9.00
7.00
7.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Sound recordings
D. Video
E. Live performances (if available)
F. Analytical In-Class presentation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Examinations

B. Research paper and listening reports
C. In-Class presentation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Select a non-Western musical instrument, read about it in the Encyclopedia of Musical
Instruments, and prepare a short report that you can share in class.
2. Read a short biography of a noted non-Western musician, and be prepared to discuss your
findings in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a written analysis of the musical structure of a piece of Indian classical music,
paying special attention to the raga and tala employed.
2. Write a paper (3-5 pages) detailing the instrumental make-up of a Gamelan from Java.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a concert of non-Western music and write a short report (2-3 pages) about your
experience.
2. Form a group of classmates, and prepare a performance of non-Western music in a style
that would use instruments you all can play.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Titon, Jeff Todd & Cooley, Tim. Worlds of Music: An Introduction. 3rd Edition. Cengage
Learning, 2009.
B. Miller, Terry. World Music: A Global Journey. 2nd Edition. Routledge, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Sound recordings that accompany the text.
B. Video documentary

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 11/03/2014

