BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 30 - Voice I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Selected by Audition
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for voice.
The focus of the course is on fundamentals: reading music, posture, rhythm, breath control, and
performance. Emphasis is on the progressive development of skills needed for solo performance.
Achievement is evaluated through a juried performance. This course is primarily intended for music
majors. (C-ID MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Sing with precise rhythm.
B. Sing the correct pitches with accurate intonation.
C. Sing with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied.
D. Sing in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing with an accompanist.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
H. Perform solos in three languages chosen from English, Italian, German, Latin, Spanish, or
French.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Voice Classification and level of ability
2. Vocalise and song assignments
3. Posture; mechanics of respiration
4. Identification of vocal apparatus
5. Phonation; Bernoulli Effect; The Glottal Stroke; Songs and vocalises
6. Coordination of respiration and phonation
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
1.50
1.00
1.00
2.00
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. Songs and vocalises
2. Phonation; Bernoulli Effect; The Glottal Stroke; Songs and vocalises

Hours
11.50
3.00

3. Articulation
4. Resonation
5. The four coordinations
6. Principles of good singing; Errors of Omission and Commission
7. Review and group practice
Total Hours

3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Performance Examinations
F. Individual demonstration of vocalises and songs
G. Performance examinations in 3 different languages
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout concerning basic vocal technique and be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read the handout concerning breath control and be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research Maria Callas and write a 1500 word research paper on her vocal technique and
style, and her influence on opera singing.
2. Attend a concert of vocal music, including a solo recital, a Broadway musical, an opera, or
pop concert and write a paper (2-3 pages) detailing your experience.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch a performance of Renee Flemming or Cecelia Bartoli and compare their vocal style
and technique to what you learned about Maria Callas.
2. Practice vocal technique one-half to one hour daily.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Paton, J. G. . Foundations in Singing.-w/keyboard. 10th Edition. Schirmer, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Lutgen Vocalises

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

