BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 32 - Voice III
Prerequisite(s): MUS 31
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for voice at
an advanced intermediate level. The focus of the course is on development of technique and
repertoire. Emphasis is on the progressive development of skills needed for solo performance.
Achievement is evaluated through a juried performance. This course is primarily intended for music
majors. (C-ID MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Sing with precise rhythm at an advanced intermediate level.
B. Sing the correct pitches with accurate intonation at an advanced intermediate level.
C. Sing with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied at an advanced intermediate level.
D. Sing in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing with an accompanist.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review of breath control and diction
2. Vocalises and song assignments
3. Respiration, Phonation, and Articulation
4. Diction; International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA); Italian diction
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
3.00
2.50
8.50

Lab
Topics
1.
Songs and vocalises
2.
English diction
3.
Italian diction
4.
Articulation
5.
Effective practice techniques
6.
Working with an accompanist
Total Hours

Hours
11.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
2.50
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Final Examination
F. Performance Examinations
G. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on American Song in "A History of Song," by Denis Stevens and be
prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read the chapter on Italian diction in "Singers' Italian" by Evelina Colorni. Be prepared to
demonstrate Italian diction in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Pick one of Richard Wagner's operas and write a 1500 page research paper detailing the
technical demands singing a role in a Wagnerian opera made upon the singer and how a
singer would meet those demands.
2. Attend a concert of vocal music: a solo recital, a musical theater production, an opera, or
pop music concert, and write a two page summary of your experience.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice Italian diction in your assigned songs a minimum of 6 hours per week.
2. Get together with a few classmates and sing for each other, and try singing some vocal
duets.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Adams, D.. A Handbook of Diction for Singers. 2nd Edition. Oxford University Press, 2008.
B. Paton, J. G. . Foundations in Singing.-w/keyboard. 10th Edition. Schirmer, 2009.
C. Paton, J. G. ed.. 26 Italian Songs and Arias. 1st Edition. Alfred, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

