BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 51 - Computer Literacy for Musicians
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture
34 hours Lab

1.5 Unit(s)

This course is a study of the operation of computers and basic practices for their use in music
composition. Emphasis is placed on computer music applications including sequencing, notation, and
sound design. The course focuses on entry-level details in system and music file management, music
recording and creation, and the practical software applications used in the music field.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate knowledge and uses of the Macintosh operating system.
B. Create, store and share basic music application documents.
C. Create and send email documents with music file and other attachments.
D. Manage file systems and sound libraries.
E. Create a podcast, movie score and other multi-media projects.
F. Compose, mix and export original music compositions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction, handout syllabus, orientation, discuss course, software
applications, and text resources.
2. Introduction to the Macintosh operating system.
3. How to configure Macintosh operating system, and create network share file
structure for music applications.
4. How to install audio recording software and sound libraries.
5. Managing user accounts, including student user accounts on the network.
6. Managing user home folders and their applications to music creation.
7. Sound library and audio file system management.
8. Recording project data management and backup.
9. Recording music in GarageBand.
10. Scoring a movie and arranging loops.
11. Creating an iPhone ringtone.
12. Mixing music and effects.
13. Composition of an original music project.
14. Sharing your finished projects.
Total Hours
Lab

Hours
1.00
1.50
1.00
1.00
1.50
1.00
1.50
1.50
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Configure Macintosh operating system and create network share file
structure for saving music compositions.
2. Explore audio recording and composition software, user accounts and file
systems.
3. Explore file system structure and data backup methods needed for large
audio recording projects.
4. Recording music in GarageBand, including choosing a template,
identifying regions and tracks, using metronome and recording guitar.
5. Scoring a movie and arranging loops, including working with the browser,
loops, and advanced arranging techniques.
6. Creating an iPhone ringtone, including recording software instruments,
editing voice track, merging instruments, and sending a ringtone to itunes.
7. Mixing Music and Effects. Create a basic mix, using volume and pan and
effects.
8. Creating podcasts. Importing a project, working with artwork and markers,
editing regions, adding a URL, and exporting final podcast.
9. Sharing finished projects. Export a movie, podcast and song to itunes, CD
and the Internet.
10. Composition of an original music project. Export final project to hard
drive, CD and the Internet.
Total Hours

Hours
1.50
1.50
1.50
3.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
11.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Lab Projects
F. Written Assignments
G. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Chapter 1 in GarageBand book. Answer questions about topics covered in those
chapters on the quiz. Review the topics in class discussion.
2. Read Chapter 4 in GarageBand book. Answer questions about topics covered in those

chapters on the quiz. Review the topics in class discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Attend a live concert and write a concert report detailing the production elements of the
show. Include instrumentation of the band, equipment used for miking and live sound.
2. Write a three page research paper on the history of electronic music. Give details on the
development of synthesizers, midi, and computer recording applications.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a live concert and take notes on the integration of digital mixing consoles,
sequencers and miking techniques used.
2. Research a major electronic music composer for TV, film or video games. Study the
methods and softwares used in these compositions, and apply these methods to your own
compositions.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Plummer, Mary and Scoppettuolo, Dion. Apple Training Series: iLife 11. 1st Edition. Peachpit
Press, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Journal, handouts, and online resources for music application software and related articles

Created/Revised by: David Elke
Date: 03/26/2012

