BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 20 - Guitar I
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Selected by audition
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for the guitar.
The focus of the course is on fundamentals: reading music, posture, hand position, fingering, rhythm,
chord structure and progressions, and performance. Emphasis is on the progressive development of
skills needed for solo performance. Achievement is evaluated through a juried performance. This
course is primarily intended for music majors. (C-ID MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Play with precise rhythm.
B. Play the correct pitches with accurate intonation.
C. Play with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied.
D. Play in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing with another musician.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction of the guitar fingerboard, chord charts and finger exercises
2. Guitar tuning methods
3. Guitar tablature and rhythmic symbols
4. Introduction of standard musical notation
5. Sight reading standard musical notation
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
1.50
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. Reading guitar tablature and symbols as well as standard musical notation;
how they compare.
2. Country and folk accompanyment in 3/4 and 4/4 time
3. Major scales in first position
4. Sight reading standard musical notation

Hours
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00

5. Introduction of rock and popular accompanyment styles
6. Discussion of rhythmic variations and bass runs
7. Basic finger picking in 3/4 time
8. Explanation of key signatures, circle of 5th and transposing
9. Arpeggio style finger picking in 4/4 time
10. Review and group practice
Total Hours

2.50
2.50
2.00
3.00
4.00
1.50
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Final Examination
C. Performance Examinations
D. Short papers
E. Subjective judgment of improvement determined by instructor
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read articles in "Guitar Player" magazine about guitar technique. Select one guitar tab,
practice it, and be prepared to demonstrate it in class.
2. Read an article in a back issue of Guitar Player magazine on-line on effective practice
techniques. Be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research Stevie Ray Vaughan and write a 1500 word research paper about his influences
and his guitar technique.
2. Attend a concert where the guitar is the primary instrument or plays a substantial role in
the concert and write a 2-3 page paper detailing your experience.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice your scales and barre chords for a minimum of 6 hours per week.
2. Select one of your favorite songs, learn to play it, and be preprared to demonstrate in class.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Leavitt, W. Modern Method for Guitar. Berklee Press, 2010.
B. Schmid, W.. Hal Leonard Guitar Method . 2nd Edition. Hal Leonard Publishing, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Guitar in playable condition
B. Flatpick
C. Music notation book

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

