BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 23 - Guitar IV
Prerequisite(s): MUS 22
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for the guitar
at an advanced level. The focus of the course continues to be on building technique and performance
confidence and adding repertoire. Emphasis is on the progressive development of skills needed for
solo performance. Achievement is evaluated through a juried performance. This course is primarily
intended for music majors. (C-ID MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Play with precise rhythm at an advanced level.
B. Play the correct pitches with accurate intonation at an advanced level.
C. Play with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied at an advanced level.
D. Play in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing as an accompanist.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. More Jazz and Blues theory: Scales, Chords, progressions, song forms
2. Advanced Ear Training
3. Development of final project
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.50
1.00
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. More classical guitar technique
2. Flatpicking vs. Fingerpicking
3. Rock and Blues soloing and improvisation
4. Contemporary style concept for arranging
5. Electric guitar pedal effects and their uses
6. Development of Final project
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
5.50
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Class participation
D. Final Examination
E. Performance Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout concerning Robert Johnson and be prepared to discuss the technical
innovations that he incorporated into Blues guitar playing.
2. Read the chapter about transposing in "Fingerboard Theory for Guitar," and incorporate
what you learn into your playing.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Attend a concert of guitar music and write a 2-3 page report that summarizes your
observations concerning guitar technique.
2. Write a 1500 word research paper on a prominent rock guitarist of your choice. What were
the technical innovations that this guitarist introduced?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice your finger picking technique on your instrument a minimum of 8 hours per
week.
2. Get together with fellow students and practice jamming together. Be prepared to perform
in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Bay, W.. Mel Bay's Guitar Class Method, Vol. 2. 3rd Edition. Mel Bay Publishing, Inc., 1980.
B. Christiansen, M.. Fingerboard Theory for Guitar. 1st Edition. Mel Bay Publishing, Inc., 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Any lead sheets or charts of pop music students want to play.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

