BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 55 - Studio Recording II
Prerequisite(s): MUS 54
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture
153 hours Lab

4 Unit(s)

This is a project-based course in which students will learn and apply advanced methods and skills to
studio recording sessions and song production. Students will schedule, organize and produce recording
sessions with musical artists. This course will provide training in advanced microphone placement and
mixing techniques. This course will also cover studio etiquette, copyright and ethics of music
ownership rights.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Schedule and organize professional studio recording projects.
B. Apply knowledge of music to the production of original songs.
C. Apply mix techniques to a multi-track recording project.
D. Set up of instruments and microphones for studio recording sessions.
E. Explain and practice proper studio etiquette when working with musical artists.
F. Evaluate copyright law and the ethics of music ownership rights.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Studio session paperwork, scheduling and managing a recording session
2. Application of music theory and arranging in recording sessions
3. Recording session set up of instruments and microphones
4. Tools and tips for mixing multitrack audio recordings
5. Methods of exporting the final audio product
6. Studio etiquette and its application to recording sessions with musical artists
7. Copyright and ethics of music ownership rights
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
3.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
17.00

Lab
Topics
1. Recording project overview and planning.
2. Set up drums, guitar amps, bass amps and other musical instruments for a
full band recording session.
3. Apply standard microphone placement technique, as well as creative
application of microphone use and placement for a full band recording
session.
4. Set up headphone mix for recording artists.

Hours
8.00
15.00
5.00

4.00

5. Set up monitoring and mixing console signal flow and routing.
6. Record scratch tracks, rhythm section tracks, and overdubs.
7. Recording project 1
Students will apply all studio methods learned to a live band studio
recording. Students will produce an original song of the guest artist,
including arranging and production. Students will set up band gear and
microphones. Students will engineer the recording of an original song.
Students will work in a group to mix, master and export final version of
recording.
8. Recording project 2
Students will network in the community to find an artist/band for the album
production project. Students will meet with the artist/band, plan the
recording of an album, and complete all necessary paperwork in preparation
for the project. Students will work in groups to produce, arrange, record and
mix an album for the selected artist/band. Students will deliver the final
mixes to the artist/band, and finish all necessary paperwork, including
recording notes. The in-depth process of recording an album will include the
applicaion of all methods and skills learned in the program to this point.
9. Review projects, and evaluate as a group the lessons learned in the recording
projects.
Total Hours

12.00
12.00
40.00

50.00

7.00
153.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Projects
C. Class participation
D. Practical Evaluations
E. Essays and research papers
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on microphone polar patterns in your text. Be prepared to discuss and
apply these concepts in class.
2. Read the article on EQ techniques provided by the instructor. Be prepared to discuss these
techniques in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 1000 word essay about drum microphone techniques. In your essay pay particular
attention to microphone placement, phase correlation and room acoustics.
2. Write a 5 page research paper on the topic of effects processing, including the

specifications and applications of reverb, delay, compression, chorus, flanging, and EQ.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a live concert and write an essay about the live sound reinforcement. Cover the
mixing console, microphones used and stage setup.
2. Find and book an artist/band for your group recording project. Meet with the artist/band
and prepare for the recording sessions. Be prepared to present a summary of your
activities to the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Huber, M,D. & Runstein, R,E. Modern Recording Techniques . 8th Edition. Focal Press, 2013.
B. Eargle,John. The Microphone Book. 2nd Edition. Hal Leonard, 2012.

Created/Revised by: David Elke
Date: 04/28/2014

