BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 60 - Performance Ensemble
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Limitation on Enrollment: Audition Required
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course is for the study, rehearsal, and public performance of literature appropriate to the
ensemble, with an emphasis on the development of skills needed to perform within an ensemble.
Different literature will be studied each semester. Choice of ensemble is based on each student’s
identified major instrument or voice. This course may be repeated three times as required for
completion of the AA-T in Music. (C-ID MUS 180).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Play or sing in time with section and ensemble as directed by the conductor.
B. Play or sing the correct pitches as indicated with accurate intonation.
C. Play or sing with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression as directed.
D. Play or sing appropriately to the ensemble.
E. Play or sing stylistically appropriately to the period/style of the composition.
F. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
G. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance within the ensemble and/or the section.
H. Memorize performance repertoire as director.
I. Adhere to professional level ensemble performance and rehearsal standards of conduct.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Rhythm
a. Precise reading of rhythm
b. Playing or singing together as a section
c. Playing or singing together as an ensemble
d. Following the conductor as applicable
2. Intonation
a. Correct reading and production of pitches
b. Tuning pitches and harmonies as a section
c. Tuning of pitches and harmonies as an ensemble
3. Articulation
a. Correct readings of markings
b. Following the conductor’s gestures as applicable
c. Agreement as a section
d. Agreement as an ensemble
4. Expression

Hours
5.50

5.50

5.00

5.00

4.

Expression
a. Correct readings of markings
b. Following the conductor’s gestures as applicable
c. Agreement as a section
d. Agreement as an ensemble
5. Ensemble specific performance practices
6. Period performance practices as applicable
7. Improvised solos as applicable
8. Memorization of performance repertoire as directed
9. Blend and Balance
a. Correct tone, volume, and timbre as appropriate to section
b. Correct tone, volume, and timbre as appropriate to ensemble
10. Professional standard of conduct
a. Demonstrate musical preparedness in rehearsal and performances
b. Demonstrate professionalism with regard to attendance, attitude,
deportment, and participation
Total Hours

5.00

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

5.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Demonstrations
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Group Participation
B. Class participation
C. Performance Examinations
D. Evaluation of public performances
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read through the scores of the music you are going to perform during the semester in
preparation for rehearsal.
2. Read the handout about the composer(s) of the music you are performing.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Keep a daily journal of your experience in your ensemble, paying attention to your growth
as a performer and a musician.
2. Write in the appropriate technical direction in your score that you will need for
performance.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not Applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The music that is to be performed in the ensemble.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

