BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 5 - American Popular Music
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the development of popular music in America, from its African and European
origins to the multitude of styles that exist today. Emphasis is on the historical and socio-economic
factors that shaped this unique body of music. Through use of lecture, sound recordings, video and
reading, students will develop a new awareness of the musical elements and stylistic continuity
present in pop music.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the six basic elements that inform all music and how these elements are
used in popular music.
B. Recognize and identify the major styles present in popular music, and the prominent performers
representative of the various styles.
C. Recognize and discuss the diversity and inter-relationship of various styles.
D. Explain the historical continuum and the socio-economic factors that helped shape popular
music.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to american popular music
2. Sources of American popular music
3. Minstrelsy, early gospel, brass band music, emergence of ragtime
4. Tin Pan Alley and the beginning of the modern music business
5. Jazz
6. Origins of Country Music and Blues
7. The roots of Rock n’ Roll: Rhythm & Blues, gospel, electric blues
8. The dominant artists and labels of Rock, 1950-1962
9. Rock in the 1960’s: The British “invasion”, Black music, Folk music, Surf
music, and the West Coast scene
10. The 1970’s: Heavy metal, Art Rock, Glam Rock, Funk; Disco, New Wave
11. The emergence of Punk and its influence
12. Country music and Jazz in the Rock era
13. Reggae and other foreign influences
14. The 1980’s: Megastars, Metal, and MTV
15. The 1990’s: Grunge and the emergence of new technology
16. The new face of the music business

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00

16. The new face of the music business
Total Hours

3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Class discussion
G. Student presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Final Examination
E. Research Paper
F. Concert Review
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the instructor-assigned textbook as well as any course handouts.
2. Read the Encyclopedia of Popular Music or any other reference sources in preparation of
a research paper.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Listen to an example of music from one of the various styles being studied and prepare a
paper that analyzes the music for both stylistic influences as well as any the quality of the
performance, and skill of the musicians.
2. Select a topic of interest to you, and prepare a substantial research paper that considers the
importance of the selected topic in the overall scheme of popular music history.
Examples: Louis Armstrong's impact on American Music; The impact of the Beatles on
the Music industry.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Select a piece of music that interests you, listen to it, and prepare a short paper describing
the music, and include some biographical information about the composer and performers
2. Attend a concert of course-related music and prepare a report on your experience.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Garofalo, R. . Rockin' Out: Popular Music in the U.S.A.. 5th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Video recordings of performances and interviews used in class are also available in the Arts
Resource Library

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 10/24/2011

