BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 21 - Guitar II
Prerequisite(s): MUS 20
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for the guitar
at an intermediate level. The focus of the course remains on fundamentals: reading music, posture,
hand position, fingering, rhythm, chord structure and progressions, and performance. Emphasis is on
the progressive development of skills needed for solo performance. Achievement is evaluated through
a juried performance. This course is primarily intended for music majors. (C-ID MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Play with precise rhythm at an intermediate level.
B. Play the correct pitches with accurate intonation at an intermediate level.
C. Play with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied at an intermediate level.
D. Play in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing as an accompanist.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review: notation and performance
2. Barre chords, moveable chord theory, and chord construction
3. Contemporary concepts for accompaniment and solo playing
4. Basic Classical guitar
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.50
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. Introduction to moveable major and minor scales
2. Introduction of Blues, Pentatonic and 6th scales applied to improvisation
over eight and 12 bar Blues Progression
3. Arpeggio Style applied to solo melody playing
4. Introduction of C.A.G.E.D. System of moveable scales and chords
5. Numbering System for chord progressions, transposition communication
6. Review and group practice

Hours
5.00
8.00
3.50
2.50
4.00
2.50

Total Hours

25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Analysis of Individual Student Performances
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Final Examination
C. Written Assignments
D. Performance Examinations
E. Subjective judgment of improvement determined by instructor
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article in "Guitar Player" magazine concerning advanced Blues playing and be
prepared to demonstrate and discuss in class.
2. Read articles in Bill Malone's "Country Music, U.S.A." dealing with rockabilly and the
early guitarists who played it and be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Attend a concert of guitar music and write a 2-3 page paper detailing your experience,
including an analysis of the music in terms of style(s) present and a critique of the
technique of the performer(s).
2. Research B. B. King and write a 1500 word research paper about his guitar technique and
his influences.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice the basic classical guitar techniques you learned in class a minimum of 6 hours
per week.
2. Get together with one of your classmates or any other musician you may know and
practice playing music together. Be prepared to discuss the challenges and what you
learned from the experience in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Mel Bay’s . Guitar Class Method,Vol.1. . 3rd Edition. Mel Bay Publishing, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Guitar - either steel string or classic
B. Capo
C. Music staff paper

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

