BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 16 - Music Theory IV
Prerequisite(s): MUS 14
Co-requisite(s): MUS 17 and MUS 23, MUS 33 or MUS 43
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course incorporates the concepts from Music Theory III. In addition, through writing and
analysis, the course will include: post-Romantic techniques such as borrowed chords and modal
mixture, chromatic mediants, Neapolitan and augmented sixth chords, 9th, 11th, and 13th chords,
altered chords and dominants; and 20th century techniques such as: Impressionism, tone rows,
pandiatonicism and polytonalism, meter and rhythm. (C-ID MUS 150).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Write and identify in context borrowed chords, Neapolitans, augmented sixth chords, 9th, 11th,
and 13th chords, added sixth chords, and altered dominants.
B. Write and recognize examples of enharmonic modulation.
C. Define, analyze, and/or write examples of 20th century techniques such as: Impressionism, tone
rows, set theory, pandiatonicism and polytonalism, and advanced approaches to meter and
rhythm.
D. Compose music using musical elements included in course content.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Borrowed chords and modal mixture
2. Chromatic mediants
3. Neapolitan and augmented-sixth chords
4. 9th, 11th, and 13th chords
5. Altered chords and dominants
6. Enharmonic reinterpretation and modulation
7. 20th century techniques such as: Impressionism, tone rows, set theory,
pandiatonicism and polytonalism, advanced approaches to meter and rhythm
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
6.00
8.00
5.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Reading Assignments

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter of the text on Blues ang Ragtime in preparation class discussion.
2. Read the chapter about Eileen Southern's "The Music of Black Americans: A History". Be
prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 1000 word paper discussing the origins of the blues and ragtime, and the role each
of these plays in the "sound" and evolution of American Popular music.
2. Compose a short piece of music for piano employing an octatonic scale, quartal, and
quintal chords. Be prepared to perform in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Listen to a recording of Schoenberg's "Klavierstucke," op. 11, no. 1, and see how many
atonal techniques you can detect. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Attend a concert of some type of American Popular music, and then write a short paper
that analyzes the music in terms of rhythmic complexity and the presence (or lack thereof)
of any blues influence.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Laitz, S.. The Complete Musician. 3rd Edition. Oxford University Press, 2011.
B. Turek, R.. Theory for Today's Musician. 1st Edition. McGraw/Hill, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Blank music paper

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

