BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 42 - Piano III
Prerequisite(s): MUS 41
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for the piano
at an advanced intermediate level. The focus is on advanced intermediate piano techniques, more
compositional processes, ensemble playing and accompanying. Emphasis is on the progressive
development of skills needed for solo performance. Achievement is evaluated through a juried
performance. This course is primarily intended for music majors.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Play with precise rhythm at an advanced intermediate level.
B. Play the correct pitches with accurate intonation at an advanced intermediate level.
C. Play with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied at an advanced intermediate level.
D. Play in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing as an accompanist or in an
ensemble.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review of basic technique
2. Review of chord progressions in major and minor keys
3. Modulation
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
4.00
2.50
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. Harmonization
2. Playing rapid repeated notes
3. Playing fioratora and other ornaments
4. Fingering
5. Improvising
6. Ensemble playing
7. Introduction to accompanying

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00

8. Performance evaluation and analysis
Total Hours

2.50
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Class participation
D. Final Examination
E. In-class performance
F. Research paper or Concert report
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about Gerald Moore in the Oxford Encyclopedia of Music, and be prepared to
discuss his importance and contributions to the art of accompanying.
2. Read the chapter on practicing in "On Piano Playing," by Gyorgy Sandor, and be prepared
to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Attend a concert where the piano is the main, or featured, instrument and write a 2 page
paper detailing your experience.
2. Write the fingering you would use into the score of Beethoven's "Fur Elise."
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice technical exercises a minimum of 6 hours per week.
2. Get together with a student in a vocal class and practice accompanying them in their songs.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Baker, K. The Complete Piano Player. 2nd Edition. Amsco Publications, 2010.
B. Hanon, C. L.. The Virtuoso Pianist, Complete. 1st Edition. G. Schirmer, 1928.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

