BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 14 - Music Theory III
Prerequisite(s): MUS 12
Co-requisite(s): MUS 15 and MUS 22, MUS 32 or MUS 42
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course incorporates the concepts from Music Theory II. In addition, through writing and analysis,
the course will include: introduction to chromatic harmony; secondary/applied chords; modulation;
borrowed chords; introduction to Neapolitan and augmented-sixth chords. (C-ID MUS 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Write and identify secondary/applied chords (dominant and fully diminished) seventh chords in
root position and inversion.
B. Write and identify borrowed chords and other mixture chords (secondary and double) in root
position and inversion.
C. Using secondary/applied 7th chords, borrowed/mixture chords, diatonic and modulation
sequences: Realize a figured bass; harmonize a given melody.
D. Conduct harmonic analysis of music using secondary/applied chords, borrowed/mixture chords
and diatonic and modulating sequences.
E. Conduct formal analysis of music which uses binary and ternary forms.
F. Compose music using musical elements included in the course content.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Secondary/applied chords
2. Modulation
3. Sequences: diatonic and modulating
4. Borrowed chords/modal mixture
5. Introduction to Neapolitan and augmented-sixth chords
6. Binary, ternary, and an overview of larger forms
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
8.00
8.00
10.00
8.00
7.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Demonstrations
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter of the text concerning Neapolitan and augmented sixth chords in
preparation for class discussion.
2. Read the chapter on Abbey Road in "The Beatles as Musicians." How did The Beatles
deviate from standard song composition on this album?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select any song from the Beatles' album "Revolver" and write a complete harmonic
analysis.
2. Create a 1 page harmonic analysis of the Adagio introduction to the 1st movement of
Beethoven's piano sonata, op. 81a, paying special attention to the use of Neapolitan and
augmented sixth chords.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a concert of your choice and write a paper detailing your experience, with the
majority of the paper reserved for analysis of the music in terms of melody, harmony,
form, and rhythm, and how all these elements interact.
2. Listen to Debussy's "Hommage a Rameau," paying special attention to how Debussy
deviates from standard harmonic practices. Be prepared to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Laitz, S.. The Complete Musician. 3rd Edition. Schirmer/Cengage, 2011.
B. Turek, R.. Theory for Today's Musician. 1st Edition. McGraw/Hill, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Blank music paper.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

