BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 33 - Voice IV
Prerequisite(s): MUS 32
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for voice at
an advanced level. The focus of the course is on continuing development of vocal technique and
repertoire building. Emphasis is on the progressive development of skills needed for solo
performance. Achievement is evaluated through a juried performance. This course is primarily
intended for music majors. (C-ID MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Sing with precise rhythm at an advanced level.
B. Sing the correct pitches with accurate intonation at an advanced level.
C. Sing with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied at an advanced level.
D. Sing in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Perform improvised solos as applicable.
F. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing with an accompanist.
G. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
H. Select literature for and perform a solo vocal recital.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review Italian and English diction
2. Vocalises and song assignments
3. Italian, French, and German diction; International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
4. Building a solo recital program
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
4.00
1.50
8.50

Lab
Topics
1.
Songs and vocalises
2.
Italian diction
3.
French diction
4.
German diction
5.
Ensemble singing
6.
Building a solo recital

Hours
11.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
2.50

Total Hours

25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Performance Examinations
E. Solo recital
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter about program building in the "The Art of the Song Recital" and begin
selecting repertoire for your own recital. Be prepared to discuss your selections in class.
2. Read the chapter on the accompanist in "The Art of the Song Recital." Be prepared to
discuss the role of the accompanist in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 1500 page research paper on any of the following song writers: Schubert,
Schumann, Brahms, Wolf, Faure, Debussy, Ives, Gershwin. Pay close attention to how
melody contruction emphasizes key words in the poetry of the lyrics.
2. Attend a concert of vocal music and write a 2-3 page summary of your experience.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice your repertoire a minimum of 6 hours per week.
2. Make rehearsal appointments with your accompanist and meet with your accompanist to
work on your recital songs.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Adams, D.. A Handbook of Diction for Singers. 2nd. Edition. Oxford University Press, 2008.
B. Walters, R. & Stolen, S. ed.. Franz Schubert -- 100 Songs. 2nd Edition. Hal Leonard, 2000.
C. Walters, R. & Kimball, C. ed.. French Song Anthology. 1st Edition. Hal Leonard, 2001.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

