BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 6 - Women and Music
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a survey of women's roles in the development of music. Students will explore why
women have been historically overlooked. Course content includes women's roles as composers,
performers, poets, patrons, promoters, and publishers.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define the roles of women in music historically, and discuss how women have been portrayed
in these roles.
B. Identify how the women’s movement of the 20th century created pathways for women
performers and composers.
C. Summarize the contributions of women in popular music and Western art music.
D. Discuss women’s experiences in the musical world of the 20th and 21st century.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to basic music terms
2. Introduction to women in music and the women's movement
3. Women in Art Music History: Antiquity to Present
a. Ancient Greece
b. Early faith communities
c. Renaissance and Baroque
d. Classical and Romantic Periods
4. Living Women in Art Music
a. Music, gender, and education
b. Women Composers
c. Female Patrons of Music
d. Emergence of Women in Professional Orchestras
e. Women Conductors
f. Women in Avant Garde Music
5. Women in Jazz, Blues and Gospel music
6. Women in Folk and Country Music
7. Women in Rock and Popular music
a. Music and Sexuality
b. Women as Producers
8. Female Musicians from a Global Perspective

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00

9.00

7.00
7.00
7.00

9.00

8. Female Musicians from a Global Perspective
a. Asia
b. Africa
c. Middle East
Total Hours

9.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a recent issue of Rolling Stone magazine with an eye toward the treatment of women
both in advertising and in articles. Be prepared to discuss your findings in class.
2. Select a biography of a well-known woman musician, read it and prepare a 3-5 page paper
detailing what you learned.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Watch the movie "The Commitments" and write a 3-5 page paper discussing the role of
the women in the band and how they were treated both on-stage and off.
2. Prepare a short list of your favorite female musicians, and in a 2-3 page paper discuss
what it is you like about them. Be prepared to discuss in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a concert that features female musician(s) and write a 2-3 page paper about your
experience.
2. Interview a local female musician, and find out about her experience as a woman in music.
Be prepared to discuss what you learned in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Dunbar, Julie. Women, Music, Culture: An Introduction. 1st Edition. Routledge, 2010.
B. O'Brien, Lucy. She Bop: The Definitive History of Women in Pop, Rock, and Soul. 3rd, revised
Edition. Jawbone Press, 2012.
C. Pendle, K. Women and Music: A History. 2nd Edition. Indiana University Press, 2001.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Class handouts
B. Compact discs

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 11/03/2014

