BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 15 - Musicianship III
Prerequisite(s): MUS 13
Co-requisite(s): MUS 14 and MUS 22, MUS 32 or MUS 42
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course applies and develops the rhythmic, melodic, and harmonic materials of Music Theory III
through ear training, sight singing, analysis, and dictation. (C-ID MUS 145).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate the ability to hear music with understanding, recognizing patterns and musical
function, by taking dictation of rhythms with triplets/duplets and syncopation in simple and
compound meter signatures.
B. Take dictation of melodies in major and minor keys with triplets/duplets, syncopation, chromatic
alterations, and modulation to closely-related keys.
C. Aurally identify and transcribing 4-part harmonic progressions utilizing secondary/applied
chords and modulation to closely-related keys.
D. Demonstrate the ability to "audiate" a musical score by sight reading and performing rhythms
with triplets/duplets and syncopation in simple and compound meters and preparing and sight
singing melodies with triplets/duplets, syncopation, chromatic alterations, and modulation to
closely-related keys.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Exercises with rhythmic patterns featuring triplets/duplets and syncopation
in simple and compound meters at various tempos
2. Dictation of rhythms with triplets/duplets and syncopation in simple and
compound meters at various tempos
3. Preparation, sight singing, and transposition of melodies featuring
chromatic alterations and modulation to closely related keys
4. Melodic dictation in a variety of major and minor keys, tempos, and meter
signatures featuring triplets/duplets, syncopation, chromatic alterations, and
modulation to closely related keys
5. Melodic dictation in two parts (two-voice counterpoint)
6. Harmonic dictation including secondary/applied chords and modulation to
closely related keys
7. Sight singing and performance of music in multiple parts (canons, duets,
chorales, etc.) appropriate to the topics studied
8. Performance of rhythm and sight singing exercises while conducting
9. Exercises to detect errors in rhythm, pitch, harmony, and/or solfeggio

Hours
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

10. Exercises at the piano, such as playing chord progressions while singing
any part or arpeggiation of the chords
Total Hours

6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Class participation
C. Lab Projects
D. Performance Examinations
E. Written Exercises
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout about Richard Wagner, paying special attention to how Wagner altered
common harmonic practices in his music, in preparation for class discussion.
2. Read the handout on "Guide to Successful Sight Singing" and practice the techniques that
you learn.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Compose a melody and harmonize it utilizing techniques used in Wagner's music.
2. Compose a 30-measure piece for unpitched percussion employing polyrhythms and
polymeters.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not Applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Benjamin, T. Horvit, M., & Nelson, R.. Music for Sight Singing. 6th Edition.
Schirmer/Cengage, 2013.
B. Horvit, M., Koozin, T., & Nelson, R.. Music for Ear Training. 4th Edition. Schirmer/Cengage,
2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Blank music paper

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

