BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
MUS 31 - Voice II
Prerequisite(s): MUS 30
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
8.5 hours Lecture
25.5 hours Lab

1 Unit(s)

This course consists of individualized study of the appropriate techniques and repertoire for voice at
an intermediate level. The focus of the course is on fundamentals: reading music, posture, breath
control, repertoire and performance. Emphasis is on the progressive development of skills needed for
solo performance. Achievement is evaluated through a juried performance. This course is primarily
intended for music majors. (C-ID MUS 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Sing with precise rhythm at an intermediate level.
B. Sing the correct pitches with accurate intonation at an intermediate level.
C. Sing with the articulation, dynamics, phrasing, and expression appropriate to the literature being
studied at an intermediate level.
D. Sing in a stylistically appropriate manner suitable to the genre, period, and style of the literature.
E. Demonstrate appropriate blend and balance when performing with an accompanist.
F. Memorize performance literature when appropriate to the performance medium and artistic
tradition.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review of basic vocal techniques
2. Voice classification, vocalises and song assignments
3. Respiration and Phonation
4. Diction; International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.50
8.50

Lab
Topics
1. Songs and vocalises
2. Diction
3. Articulation
4. Principles of good singing: Errors of Omission and Commision
5. Effective practice techniques
6. Working with an accompanist
Total Hours

Hours
11.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.50
2.50
25.50

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
D. Final Examination
E. Performance Examinations
F. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Pick one or two singers interviewed in "Great Singers on Great Singing" and be prepared
to discuss their career and ideas on vocal technique in class.
2. Read the chapters on vocal technique in "On Studying Singing" by Sergius Kagen, and be
prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Attend a vocal concert, musical, or opera, and write a 2 page paper detailing your
observations of the singers vocal technique.
2. Pick a popular singer of the last 50 years and write a 1500 word research paper on this
person's life and the influences of their vocal style.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Practice vocal technique a minimum of 6 hours per week.
2. View a "Live from the Met" performance at the local theater or on DVD, and be prepared
to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Paton, J. G. . Foundations in Singing.-w/keyboard. 10th Edition. Schirmer, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Mark Latham
Date: 09/30/2013

