BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NR 26 - Environmental World
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV, English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an interdisciplinary study of the world environment with a focus on human use and
protection of natural resources across ethnic and cultural boundaries. Environmental issues involving
the exploitation and conservation of natural resources will be studied for their modern as well as
historical, political, economic and social implications. Particular attention is paid to the condition of
natural resources, including soil, water, forest, mineral, plant and animal life throughout California.
The citizen's role in natural resource conservation is stressed throughout the course. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe environmental issues related to cultural and ethnic diversity, and discuss ideas to
reduce the human impact on the environment.
B. Evaluate ecological inter-relationships between living and non-living components of an
ecosystem.
C. List and evaluate human influences and potential impacts on the conservation of our natural
resources.
D. Identify and describe characteristics and general distributions of major biomes and discuss how
humans have impacted each of them.
E. Explain how the use and misuse of mineral, forest, wildlife, agricultural land and water
resources impact our world environments.
F. List and analyze historical and theoretical factors that have contributed to human population
growth, including ethnicity and cultural aspects.
G. Differentiate between the sources of land degradation and list possible sustainable solutions for
each source.
H. List the sources of air and water pollution and identify how these pollutants are hazardous to the
health of humans, plants, and wildlife.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding Our Environment
2. Environmental Systems: Matter and Energy of Life
3. Evolution, Species Interactions, and Biological Communities
4. Human Populations
5. Biomes and Biodiversity
6. Environmental Conservation: Forests, Grasslands, Parks, and Nature
Preserves
7. Food and Agriculture

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

8. Environmental Health and Toxicology
9. Climate
10. Air Pollution
11. Water: Resources and Pollution
12. Environmental Geology and Earth Resources
13. Energy
14. Solid and Hazardous Waste
15. Economics and Urbanization
16. Environmental Policy and Sustainability
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Multicultural Case Studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Class participation
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Short papers
G. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on energy sources and be prepared to discuss in class the issues related
to the use of fossil-fuels.
2. Read an article on the United States population trends and present your findings to the
class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Select a recent news article on environmental issues and write a one page synopsis about
the issue.
2. Write a 3 page research paper on the benefits and consequences of "fracking" and be sure
to cite your sources.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Use the ecological footprint calculator on the Internet to determine your ecological
footprint and report your findings during the next class.
2. Attend a local land-use planning meeting and write a brief summary of the meeting.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Enger, E.D., and Smith, B.F. Environmental Science: A Study of Interrelationships. 13th
Edition. McGraw Hill, 2013.
B. Cunningham, P., and Cunningham, M.A. Principles of Environmental Science: Inquiry and
Applications. 7th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Selected readings from library/Internet

Created/Revised by: Ricky Wittsell
Date: 04/07/2014

