BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NR 60 - Natural Resources Law
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to the management
and protection of natural resources. Topics include the history and development of environmental law
including Air and Water Quality Acts, National Environmental Policy Act, and Endangered Species
Act. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the pertinent legislative entities and environmental laws, their history and development.
B. Describe how the laws of a community reflect moral and ethical commitments to the
environment and sustainability.
C. Locate and analyze the federal and state acts, statutes and regulations which protect the
environment.
D. Explain the biological, chemical and physical reactions of the environment to deleterious acts
and processes.
E. Identify the procedures required by law for the purpose of mitigating damage to the
environment by industry and human development.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Law
2. The American Legal System: The Source of Environmental Law
3. The Litigation Process and Other Tools for Resolving Environmental
Disputes
4. Aministrative Law and Its Impact on the Environment
5. An Introduction to Environmental Law and Policy
6. Air-Quality Control
7. Water-Quality Control
8. Controlling Toxic Substances
9. Waste Management and Hazardous Releases
10. Energy
11. Natural Resources
12. International Environmental Law
13. Environmental Impact Report
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Written Assignments
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article on a violation related to hunting out of season and be prepared to discuss
in class.
2. Read a case law regarding controversial development on forested land and summarize
your findings.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Pick one of your favorite environmental laws and write a 1500 word paper identifying
how it impacts you personally.
2. Attend a County Board of Supervisors meeting and write a 300 word report on the
meeting.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a government meeting related to environmental issues and make a report on the
issues and outcome.
2. Work with other students to prepare a "skit" based on case law, to be shared with the class.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Kubasek, N.K. and Silverman, G.S. Environmental Law. 8th Edition. Pearson Custom Business
Resources, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Ricky Wittsell
Date: 04/07/2014

