BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NR 28 - Environmental Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV, English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the conservation and management of natural resources. Students will
learn about the diverse agencies that manage our resources along with their history and philosophies.
The major natural resources including water, air, energy, forests, wildlife, agriculture, and soils will be
covered and students will learn about the environmental policy and laws that govern use of these
resources. An emphasis is placed on the practical components of Environmental Science as it relates to
social and economic aspects of conservation.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe and apply the basic elements of the scientific method to problems in the field.
B. Distinguish among the various types of natural resources and how they are used.
C. Evaluate the effects of our human population upon the earth's resources.
D. Assess the various reasons for protecting and maintaining biodiversity.
E. Evaluate different management practices used to maintain forest ecosystems and wildlife
resources.
F. Evaluate the various resource agencies and their management philosophies.
G. Assess the role of parks, national forests, and wilderness play in our society.
H. Distinguish among the various causes of soil erosion.
I. Evaluate and discuss the sources of air and water pollution along with some of the solutions to
those problems.
J. Investigate how alternative energy sources can be used to meet future demand.
K. Evaluate environmental policies and their effectiveness in resources conservation.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Environmental Interrelationships
2. Environmental Ethics
3. Environmental Risk
4. Kinds of Ecosystems and Communities
5. Energy and Civilization: Pattern of Consumption
6. Nuclear Energy
7. Biodiversity Issues
8. Land-Use Planning
9. Agricultural Methods and Pest Management
10. Air Quality Issues
11. Solid Waste Management and Disposal

Hours
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
2.00

12. Environmental Regulations: Hazardous Substances and Wastes
Total Hours

2.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Scientific Investigation and study of Ecosystems
2. Environmental Interrelationships
3. Environmental Ethics
4. Environmental Risk
5. Kinds of Ecosystems and Communities
6. Energy and Civilization: Pattern of Consumption
7. Nuclear Energy
8. Biodiversity Issues
9. Land-Use Planning
10. Agricultural Methods and Pest Management
11. Air Quality Issues
12. Solid Waste Management and Disposal
13. Environmental Regulations: Hazardous Substances and Wastes
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Field Trips
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Oral Presentation
E. Journal
F. Lab Projects
G. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article, "Most Wars Occur In Earth's Richest Biological Regions," posted online
and discuss the reading assignment with other students and the instructor.
2. Read the chapter on Land-Use Issues from the textbook and bring in a local land-use issue
facing us today. Be prepared to discuss these issues with the class and instructor.
B. Writing Assignments

1. Pick a recent and political hotbed environmental issue. Prepare a three page report on the
subject and be sure to cite your sources.
2. Read a journal article about biodiversity and write a one page synopsis about the article.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Find a National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) required environmental impact report
and present a brief synopsis of its contents to the class.
2. Evaluate species diversity in and around where you live. Report your findings to the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Enger, E.D., and Smith, B.F. Environmental Science: A Study of Interrelationships. 13th
Edition. McGraw Hill, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Journal articles, environmental impact reports, and news articles provided by the instructor.

Created/Revised by: Ricky Wittsell
Date: 04/07/2014

