BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NR 65 - Recreational Land Management
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the techniques, issues and laws pertaining to recreational land
management. Topics include types of recreational activities, evaluation of site resources, maintainance
and operation of outdoor recreational facilities. Analyses of social and economic factors that affect
participation in recreational activities will be included.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify career opportunities, educational requirements, qualifications and duties outdoor
recreation field personnel.
B. Identify and differentiate between local, county, state, federal and private recreational agencies.
C. Describe the socio-economic factors that influence participation in outdoor recreation.
D. Evaluate recreation facilities and resources, identifying maintenance requirements, potential
hazards, traffic and people flow.
E. Identify the interpersonal skills required to work with the public.
F. Describe recreational ethics as they apply to recreational activities.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Career opportunities in outdoor recreation
2. Leisure Activities
3. Recreation Providers
4. Outdoor Recreation Management
5. Economic Impact of Outdoor Recreation
6. Problem areas in Outdoor recreation
Total Hours

Hours
5.50
5.50
6.50
5.50
5.50
5.50
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Discovering Career Opportunities and Visiting Recreational Sites
2. Leisure Activities
3. Recreational Providers
4. Outdoor Recreation Management
5. Economic Impact of Outdoor Recreation
6. Problem areas in Outdoor recreation
Total Hours

Hours
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
51.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Collaborative Group Work
F. Field Trips
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Journal
D. Mid-term and final examinations
E. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article on the history of outdoor recreation and be prepared to discuss your
findings with the class.
2. Read an article from the internet on trends for outdoor recreation types and prepare a
graph displaying the demographics for each category.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 3 page summary paper on the history of the National Park system. Be sure to
include all of the players and events that led to the creation of Yellowstone National Park.
2. Write a 2 page paper on the safety issues surrounding recreational lands and facilities.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit a recreation facility manager and interview him/her regarding their responsibilities
relating to operation and maintenance of that facility. Be prepared to give an oral report on
your findings to the class.
2. Prepare a demonstration that will show the type of equipment, rigging of equipment,
safety issues and regulations relating to a recreational site of your choice.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Jensen, C. R., & Guthrie, S. P. Outdoor Recreation in America. 6th Edition. Human Kinetics
Publishers, 2006.
B. Mallen, C. & Adams, L. Event Management in Sport, Recreation and Tourism. 2nd Edition.
Routledge, 2013.
C. Torkildsen, G. Torkildsen's Sport and Leisure Management. 6th Edition. Routledge, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Ricky Wittsell
Date: 04/07/2014

