BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 69 - Gerontology/Community Based Nursing
Prerequisite(s): Admission to ADN Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 71
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course focuses on the needs of the older adults and the disabled/chronically ill older adult in the
community, home health, and dementia care settings. Course content builds on the student's
knowledge of the aging process by the study of dynamics, etiology, and treatment of the rapidly
growing aging population. Emphasis is placed on assisting client adaptation to normal age-related
changes and chronic aging conditions as well as healthy/robust aging practices. Course content
includes geriatric nursing, management of chronic illness, and healthy aging. The nursing process is
utilized to assist the student in the planning of goal directed care for this client population.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply the nursing process to caring for older adults, families, and groups in community
settings.
B. Identify and discuss methods to successfully provide culturally appropriate care in community
settings.
C. Discuss the role of the nurse in a variety of community practice settings including hospice.
D. Compare and contrast nursing roles in case management and continuity of care in community
settings to promote client adaptation.
E. Discuss aspects of respectful nursing care of the patient who is close to death.
F. Describe basic statistics related to aging and aging in America.
G. Compare and contrast theories of aging, both biological and psychosocial.
H. Employ the nursing process to describe common geriatric conditions.
I. Utilize principles of healthy aging to promote adaptation in older adults.
J. Discuss selected issues related to older clients: depression, dementia, sexuality, and elder
neglect and abuse.
K. Create a teaching plan for the individual client, family, or community.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of Community Based Nursing (CBN) and Gerontology
2. CBN and gerontology ssessment
3. Practice Settings
4. Economics of Health Care Delivery
5. Cultural Care
6. Case Management and continuity of care
7. Healthy Aging

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
6.00

8. Common Geriatric Concerns
9. Selected Elder Issues
10. Teaching
11. Spirituality
12. Death and Dying
Total Hours

7.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapters in the geriatric nursing text and community based nursing text that focus on
culture, family care, and levels of prevention. Answer an instructor generated set of
objectives. Come to class prepared to discuss the objectives.
2. Read and summarize the article "Pain Assessment and Management in Persons with
Dementia" by A.L. Horgas & L. Miller. Submit a paper at least five paragraphs long
demonstrating comprehension of the information.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze the article "The Way We Age Now" by A. Gawande. Summarize the article
focusing on how medicine has increased the ranks of the elderly.
2. Given a set of death and dying case studies share your thoughts and feelings with four
class mates. Each student will write a one page paper with their thoughts and feelings.
Review each of these papers and make a 3 paragraph written response. Evaluation will
focus on relationship of the initial paper and the responses to material presented in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. From a list of community resources provided by the instructor, visit and write up a
description of the community resource site. An interview of an administrator,
reimbursements, and the population served must be identified by the student in a three
page writting paper.
2. Write a two-page description of a "perfect" hospital environment to meet the needs of a
patient with Alzheimer's disease. Use readings and observation of the hospital
environment for backgound information.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hunt, R. . Introduction to Community Based Nursing. 7th Edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
2009.
B. Ebersole, P. and Hess, P. . Geriatric Nursing and Healing Aging. 4th Edition. St. Louis, Mosby,

2009.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

