BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 21 - Clinical Nursing I
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Vocational Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 22, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
357 hours Lab

7 Unit(s)

In this course students apply fundamental nursing skills and provide client care for adults. The course
provides the opportunity to apply didactic information from concurrent nursing courses to the clinical
setting. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate skill in performing selected nursing procedures required to meet the client’s basic
needs for personal hygiene, comfort, and safety in the setting of a therapeutic environment while
observing patient rights..
B. Utilize basic communication skills to work effectively with health team members to provide
individualized and culturally appropriate nursing care.
C. Administer medications safely.
D. Follow legal standards of practice.
E. Present a professional image.
F. Demonstrate ability to accurately assess client vital signs and recognize other basic signs of life.
G. Recognize verbal and nonverbal signs of pain and identify appropriate nursing interventions
used to control pain.
H. Demonstrate the ability to use safe body mechanics, applying principles of nursing care to
increase or maintain a client's level of mobility and prevent and control the complications of
immobility.
I. Apply principles of nursing care to maintain skin integrity and promote healing.
J. Demonstrate the principles of basic infection control in the clinical setting.
K. List client intake and output components and accurately perform and record measurements of
intake and output.
L. Utilize the nursing process when carrying out nursing skills.
M. Maintain client confidentiality according to HIPPA and institutional regulations.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Week 1-7 (7 weeks/21 hours per week) On campus skills laboratory
practicing fundamental nursing skills Times and days of week vary
2. Week 8-17 (10 weeks/21 hours per week) Clinical practicum at local area
hospitals Wednesday 0800-1200 4 hrs. Thursday 0630-1500 8.5 hrs. Friday
0630-1500 8.5 hrs.
Total Hours

Hours
147.00
210.00

357.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Skills laboratory practicing fundamental nursing skills
B. Instructor-supervised Care of Clients
C. Nursing Assessments
D. Patient Care Plans
E. Post Conferences
F. Written Clinical Case study packet
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Return Demonstration of Selected Procedures
B. Clinical Worksheets
C. Written Assignments
D. Clinical Evaluation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Carpenito-Moyet, Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice to help
determine appropriate nursing diagnoses for clients in the clinical setting.
2. Read Fundamentals of Nursing text for description of specific nursing skills prior to
practicing these skills in the hospital lab practicum.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Given a vignette of a specific client, role play symptoms and write a full narrative
assessment. Use the nursing process to determine nursing diagnosis problem statements
for the client.
2. Complete chart search, physical assessment, medication and treatment review for each
client you are assigned to care for in the clinical setting.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View Mosby's Video skills DVDs and complete worksheet for each prior to practicing
skills in lab.
2. Develop a complete nursing care plan based on care and assessment of each client.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Deglin, J. H., & Vallerand, A. H. . Davis's Drug Guide . 12th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis., 2011.
B. Pagana, J.D. and Pagana, T.J.. Mosby's Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests. 4th Edition.
Mosby, Elsevier, 2010.
C. Kozier, B., Erb, G, Berman, A. & Snyder, S.. Fundamentals of Nursing: Concepts, Process and
Practice. 9th Edition. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2012.
D. Lewis, S.M., Heitkemper, M. & Dirksen, S.R. . Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition. St.
Louis: C.V. Mosby, 2011.
E. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
F. Abrams, A.C.. Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales for Nursing Practice. 9th Edition. Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
G. Thomas, C.L.. Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary. 21st Edition. F.A. Davis, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Mosby's Nursing Video Skills: Student Version DVD 3.0

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 02/27/2012

