BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 81 - Theory Integration Seminar IV
Prerequisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 69, NSG 71
Co-requisite(s): NSG 74, NSG 77, NSG 78, NSG 79
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course applies the integration of critical thinking skills and didactic content to clinical case
studies in mental health, management, and acute medical surgical nursing content. The student will
clarify roles and develop plans of care for clients through the life span. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the steps of the nursing process through clinical case studies in mental health,
management and acute medical surgical.
B. Demonstrate advanced physical assessments of the acute medical surgical client through the life
span.
C. Analyze and discuss case studies of clients with complex health care problems and mental health
diagnoses, and management situations.
D. Apply concepts of the nursing process and nursing knowledge to selected case studies.
E. Demonstrate qualities that foster therapeutic nurse-patient relationships and qualities that
contribute to a nontherapeutic nursing interactive process.
F. Identify the role of the nurse in crisis intervention.
G. Discuss various modalities relevant to treatment of psychiatric disorders.
H. Formulate nursing diagnoses and outcomes of care for clients with eating disorders.
I. Describe interventions for behaviors associated with eating disorders.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Crisis Intervention Skills
2. Treatment Modalities
3. Complimentary Alternative Therapies
4. Therapeutic Communication Skills
5. Eating Disorders
6. Victims of Abuse
7. Renal Concepts
8. Neurological Concepts
9. Immune/Hematologic Concepts
10. Endocrine Concepts
11. Kaplan Integrated Testing (Medical Surgical Comprehensive)
12. Shock/Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS)
13. Physical Assessment of Complex Medical Surgical Clients

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
6.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00

14. Application and Analysis of case studies in mental health and acute medical
surgical nursing.
Total Hours

2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Guest Speakers
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Focused Assessment Skills
D. Video/Discussion
E. Group Activities
F. Student Presentations
G. Computer Assisted Instruction
H. Case studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Class participation
B. Class Presentations
C. Case Studies
D. Physical Assessment Skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter 23 in your textbook. Identify nursing diagnoses, goals of care and
appropriate nursing interventions for care of victims of intimate partner violence, child
abuse and sexual assault.
2. Read Immunology & Hematology chapters in your textbook. Prepare to create a study
guide, based on specific questions, regarding complex issues related to Immunology and
Hematology in the adult client.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the article "See What I'm Saying" by Nathaniel Reade. Please post your responses
on Blackboard. Be prepared to discuss therapeutic communication.
2. Read the assigned reading. In groups, write multiple choice questions representing each
level og Bloom's Taxonomy. Analyze and critique the questions of another group.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View one of the movies on Blackboard and respond to the questions regarding the movie
you viewed. Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. View uploaded videos related to endocrine diseases for the complex medical-surgical
client.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Townsend, M. C.. Essentials of Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing, Concepts of Care in
Evidenced-based Practice. 5th Edition. F.A. Davis, 2011.
B. Weber, J. R.. Nurse's handbook of health assessment. 7th Edition. Lippincott, Williams and
Wilkins, 2009.
C. Urden, Stacy & Lough. Critical Care Nursing. 6th Edition. Mosby, 2010.
D. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner and Suddarth's Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:

A. Web links associated with text content. Internet resources are of a time sensitive nature and
addresses may change or be deleted. Searches may be conducted by using a search engine and
entering the topic.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

