BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 64 - Transition to ADN Nursing I
Prerequisite(s): Currently licensed as a Licensed Vocational Nurse
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course assists the LVN in acquiring nursing skills and processes necessary for functioning in the
second year of an associate degree-nursing program. The course introduces the philosophy and
conceptual framework of the program and the roles of the registered nurse as a care provider. The
course content will focus on competencies expected of the graduate ADN, critical thinking skills,
problem solving skills, role development, and nursing assessment and documentation. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate basic intravenous medication administration skills.
B. Discuss the steps of the nursing process.
C. Demonstrate techniques of nursing assessment and documentation.
D. Compare and contrast the competencies for LVN and RN roles.
E. Apply concepts of critical thinking to behaviors while participating in high fidelity simulation.
F. Utilize study skills throughout the course to optimize student success.
G. Utilize psychomotor skills to complete RN level nursing procedures.
H. Demonstrate dimensional analysis math computations as they apply to administration of
medications.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Math for nurses
2.
Nursing process
3.
Advanced bedside skills
4.
Critical thinking skills/study skills
5.
Introduction to role
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Skills lab participation
H. Math computation exercises

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Papers
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Final Examination
F. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in the text Harrington & Terry's LPN to RN Transitions on role
development and transition. Come to class prepared to discuss the content of the reading.
2. Read and write a one page reflection on the article "LPN to RN: A win-win situation for
nursing education" from Teaching & Learning in Nursing (2009)4, 10-13.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Demonstrate the ability to accurately synthesize a given set of clinical data by writing a
coherent client specific nursing care plan that identifies measurable clinical outcomes for
the client.
2. Using the text and class lectures, write a critical appraisal of "student success at the
associate degree nursing level".
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete an instructor generated set of questions to demonstrate mastery of nursing drug
math using dimensional analysis.
2. Develop mastery in new skills learned in class, practice nursing assessment skills. Be
prepared to demonstrate mastery during skill testing at the end of the course.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Olsen, J.L.,Giangrasso, A.P., & Shrimpton,D.. Medical Dosage Calculations . 10th Edition. New
Jersey. Prentice Hall, 2011.
B. Harrington, N. & Terry, C.L.. LPN to RN Transitions: Achieving Success in Your New Role.
3rd Edition. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
C. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

