BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 22 - Gerontology Nursing
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Vocational Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 21, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course introduces the vocational nursing student to the facts and myths of the older population,
common conditions and diseases, assistive and restorative resources, and the older person's
physiological and psychological responses to illness and medication. Included in the unit is the normal
physiological and psychological aging process as well as information supportive of positive and
healthy aging. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze population trends involving the elderly.
B. Describe common misconceptions about the elderly and provide accurate information for each.
C. Identify and describe programs, agencies, organizations. agency resources, and services
available to assist the elderly or care givers.
D. Compare and contrast normal age related changes with abnormal pathophysiological changes in
older adults.
E. Describe common conditions and disorders associated with aging and their general related
nursing care.
F. Describe techniques and communication skills to enhance interaction with the elderly and the
self-esteem of the elderly.
G. Identify self-help aids and assistive devices which will support independence in elderly
individuals.
H. List the developmental tasks and psychological changes associated with aging.
I. Describe activities or actions which can improve an individual’s life during her or his later years.
J. Describe age related changes, which influence response to drugs and illness including common
problems experiences by the elderly.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Myths/Realities of Old Age Demographics
2. Theories of Aging Psychosocial Adjustment to Aging
3. Normal Biological Aging
4. Common Conditions and Disorders of Aging
5. Illness and drugs in the older population
6. Restorative/Adaptive Care Community Resources
7. Healthy Aging
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on health assessment of the older adult. Be prepared to discuss the
reading in class.
2. Read the chapter on age related changes in the text. Come to class prepared to discuss the
readings.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Utilize class handouts and the chapter on assessment of the older adult in the text to
describe the health assessment of older adults. Focus on factors that place older adults at
risk while hospitalized. Write 4 to 5 paragraphs responding to instructor generated
questions related to the readings.
2. Read and summarize the article Theories of Aging, focusing on one theory of aging. Write
4 to 5 paragraphs responding to instructor generated questions related to the article.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using class handouts and readings from the text analyze your home in terms of a safe
environment for an older adult with sensory impairments and/or mobility problems.
Prepare a 2 page paper summarizing your findings using APA format.
2. Using class handouts and readings from the text design the "perfect hospital environment"
for a patient with dementia. Compare and contrast the current hospital environment to
your "perfect" design.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Thomas, C.L.. Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary. 21st Edition. F.A. Davis, 2009.
B. Deglin JH, Vallerand, AH, and Sanoski, CA. Davis’s Drug Guide for Nurses. 12th Edition. F.A.
Davis, 2011.
C. Wold, G.. Basic Geriatric Nursing. 4th Edition. Mosby, Elsevier, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Class Handouts

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 04/02/2012

