BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 200 - Certified Nurses Aide Basic Nursing Care, Theory
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Nursing Assistant Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 201
Recommended Prep: Reading Level II; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: NT
60 hours Lecture

3.5 Unit(s)

This course covers the Certified Nurse's Aide (CNA) theory of care in long term settings. The major
focus is patient care skills, patient care procedures, and how to respond to individuals and occurrences
associated with long term care. Additional content in the course presents the role and responsibilities
of the certified nursing assistant, basic principles of asepsis, safety, nutrition and rehabilitation.
Successful completion of this course and NSG 201 qualifies the student to take the Written and
Manual Skills testing for State Certification. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. provide safe and competent personal care of patients in long-term care settings.
B. apply measures that allow for safety, cleanliness, and infection control.
C. discuss factors which influence the quality of life for the disabled and elderly.
D. respond appropriately to individuals using therapeutic communication and occurrences
associated with long-term care.
E. describe common long-term diseases/conditions, related nursing care, and rehabilitation
techniques.
F. discuss the role of the nursing assistant, and the moral and legal aspects of providing care, and
the rights of patients.
G. describe the basic principles of nutrition, and diets.
H. demonstrate correct mathematical calculations related to CNA nursing care.
I. prepare complete and correct documentation of the care delivered to the client.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Role and Responsibilities of the CNA
2. Patient Rights
3. Interpersonal Skills
4. Prevention and Management of Catastrophe and Unusual Occurrences
5. Body Mechanics
6. Medical and Surgical Asepsis
7. Weights and Measures
8. Patient Care Skills
9. Patient Care Procedures
10. Vital Signs
11. Nutrition

Hours
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
14.00
7.00
3.00
2.00

11. Nutrition
12. Emergency Procedures
13. Long-term Patient
14. Rehabilitative Nursing
15. Observation and Charting
16. Death and Dying
17. Individualized Instruction
Total Hours

2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
60.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Multimedia Presentations
D. Small Group Activities
E. Group Discussion
F. Case Studies
G. Team Projects
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Exams/Quizzes
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter "Vital Signs" in your textbook and be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read an article on client rights and be prepared to respond to examples of clients' rights
being broken.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a one page summary of an article on aging. Be prepared to analysis and discuss in
class.
2. Write out documentation of client care provided to a client for two separate days.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe an elderly person in a public place and observe any mobility issues and write up a
description of how they dealt with this and what devices they used to aid with this
disability.
2. Working in a group, prepare an oral report on a disease assigned to you by the instructor
covering physiology, causes, complications, medical treatment, and nursing care.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Carter P.. Lippincott's Nursing Assistants: A Humanistic Approach to Caregiving Workbook.
3rd Edition. Lippincott, 2012.
B. Carter, P.. Lippincott's Nursing Assistants: A Humanistic Approach to Caregiving. 3rd Edition.
Lippincott, 2012.
C. Fuzy, J., & Leahy, W.. The Home Health Aide Handbook. 1st Edition. Hartman, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Lippincott's Video Series for Nursing Assistants; Carter, Pamela J. 2012.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 04/16/2012

