BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 32 - Perioperative Nursing and Client Education
Prerequisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 21, NSG 22, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Co-requisite(s): NSG 31, NSG 35, NSG 36, NSG 37
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course provides an introduction to nursing care related to clients in the preoperative,
intraoperative and postoperative phases of surgical care. Included is a focused study of the teaching
needs of clients and families in perioperative settings. Development of client education skills,
awareness of barriers to client learning, and a review of adult learning styles is included. Medications
used during each phase of the perioperative process is addressed. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the nursing care of preoperative, intraoperative and postoperative clients.
B. Apply principles of the nursing process to the care of clients in the perioperative setting.
C. Develop teaching plans for the postoperative client to facilitate healing based on principles of
adult learning.
D. Describe the influences of cultural, psychosocial, and spiritual factors to the success of client
teaching.
E. Utilize therapeutic communication strategies in the care of clients and families.
F. Describe caring interventions in the care of the perioperative client.
G. Describe procedures to ensure safe administration of medications given to clients in the
perioperative setting.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Preoperative nursing care
2.
Intraoperative nursing care
3.
Postoperative nursing care
4.
Client education
5.
Introduction to perioperative nursing
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
9.00
7.00
7.00
5.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion

E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout "Care of the pre-operative client". Be prepared to answer questions in
class regarding the reading.
2. Read the medical surgical text on intraoperative nursing care. Answer an instructor
generated set of objectives.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Use a case scenario of a pre-operative client with multiple health care issues. Write a two
page paper addressing instructor generated questions.
2. Complete a worksheet covering perioperative nursing care describing and analyzing
potential problems related to a specific surgical procedure.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Given a perioperative client scenario, develop a teaching plan based on principles
discussed in class. In groups of four students demonstrate the teaching plan to the class by
developing a scenario and using role playing.
2. Develop a formal teaching plan for one assigned patient. Write a paper detailing the goals
and objectives, barriers to learning, interventions, and evaluation. Use APA format.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Deglin, J. H., & Vallerand, A. H. . Davis’s Drug Guide for Nurses. 12th Edition. Philadelphia:
F. A. Davis., 2009.
B. Abrams, A. C. . Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales for Nursing Practice. 9th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, 2009.
C. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
D. Kozier, B., Erb, G., Blais, K., & Wilkinson, J. M. . Fundamentals Of Nursing: Concepts,
Process, And Practice . 8th Edition. New Jersey: Peason/Prentice Hall, 2009.
E. Lewis, S. M., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S. R. Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition. St.
Louis: C. V. Mosby, 2011.
F. Pagana, K. D., & Pagana, T. J.. Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. 4nd Edition. St.
Louis, MO: Mosby, 2010.
G. Thomas, C. L. (Ed.). Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary. 21th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 04/02/2012

