BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 24 - Musculoskeletal Nursing
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Vocational Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 21, NSG 22, NSG 23 and NSG 28
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course provides a foundation in the study of nursing process, basic physiology and
pathophysiology related to adult clients experiencing disorders of the musculoskeletal system. Graded
only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the basic anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology of the musculoskeletal system.
B. Utilize the nursing process as applicable to adults experiencing musculoskeletal disorders.
C. Describe principles, practices, and skills applicable to the nursing care of adults with
musculoskeletal conditions.
D. Explain health maintenance strategies related to musculoskeletal conditions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Overview of musculoskeletal system
2. Manifestations of dysfunction
3. Diagnostic/Radiologic studies
4. General nursing interventions
5. Traumatic conditions
6. Surgical conditions
7. Infections Inflammations Metabolic disorders
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
B. Assigned Readings
C. Lecture/Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Homework
D. Class participation

VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on assessment of the musculoskeletal system in the medical-surgical text
book to answer instructor generated objectives. Come to class prepared to discuss these
objectives.
2. After reading the chapter in the medical-surgical textbook on connective tissue diseases,
come to class prepared to discuss the case study presented at the end of the chapter.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In class, discuss and prioritize nursing actions related to an instructor generated question.
Using this information, complete the handout regarding prioritizing care.
2. Complete the instructor prepared case study. Complete the case study objectives using a
prepared set of questions using APA format.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using an instructor designed worksheet, give a description of and describe the purpose
and nursing responsibilities of diagnostic studies of the musculoskeletal system.
2. Using a instructor generated case study presenting a postoperative musculoskeltal patient,
complete a care plan that includes two nursing diagnoses using the format presented in the
LVN program.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Abrams, A. C. . Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales for Nursing Practice . 9th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, 2009.
B. Deglin, J. H., & Vallerand, A. H. . Davis's Drug Guide . 12th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis., 2011.
C. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
D. Kozier, B., Erb, G, Berman, A. & Snyder, S. Fundamentals of Nursing: Concepts, Process, and
Practice . 9th Edition. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2009.
E. Lewis, S. M., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S. R. . Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition. St.
Louis: C. V. Mosby, 2011.
F. Lewis, S. M., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S. R. . Study Guide Medical-Surgical Nursing. 6th
Edition. St. Louis: C. V. Mosby, 2004.
G. Pagana, K. D., & Pagana, T.J. Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests . 4th Edition. St.
Louis, MO: Mosby, 2010.
H. Thomas, C. L. (Ed.). Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary . 21th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 02/27/2012

