BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 74 - Nursing Leadership and Management of Patient Care
Prerequisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 69, NSG 71
Co-requisite(s): NSG 77, NSG 78, NSG 79, NSG 81
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course provides an opportunity for students enrolled in the Associate Degree Nursing (ADN)
program to develop skills in leading and managing patient care. Content includes presentation of the
registered nurse’s role in planning, organizing, staffing and directing safe patient-centered care.
Professional and social issues in leadership and management will also be discussed. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe concepts of the integrated roles of leading, managing, and following within the nursing
staff role.
B. Utilize knowledge of legal issues, ethical principles, and organizational structure in effective
patient advocacy.
C. Apply effective communication, conflict resultion, change managment, and leadership skills to
promote collaborative interdisciplinary patient centered care.
D. Identify nursing interventions necessary to maintain a safe environment for patients and staff.
E. Demonstrate proficiency in personal professional career management.
F. Describe the scope of practice for the registered nurse in California.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Professional Considerations: The integrated roles of leading, managing and
following; Legal Issues; Ethical Issues in Nursing; Organizations, Power,
and Empowerment; and Patient Advocacy
2. Working within the organization: Teamwork; Problem Solving/Conflict
Management; The Change Process; Delegation /Supervision; Quality and
Safety; Evidence-based Practice; Continuity of care; Interdisciplinary
Planning; and BRN Scope of Practice
3. Professional Issues: Workplace Health and Saftey; Stress and Burnout; Time
Management; and Career Management
Total Hours

Hours
12.00

16.00

6.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion

D. Assigned readings
E. Written assignments
F. Case studies for problem solving
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers/Reports
B. Class Presentations
C. In class assignments
D. Computerized proctored and non-proctored quizzes and exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Yoder-Wise Chapter 51, ATI Leadership Book Chapter 3, Powerpoint presentations
(Ethical and Legal Aspects of Practice and Patient Advocacy), and the Advocacy Case
Study. Be prepared to have a meaningful discussion with your classmates in class.
2. Read Yoder-Wise, Chapter 7 and Chapter 8. Be prepared to list and discuss healthcare
services that are available in your community that have been established within the last
five years.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a final Cover Letter and Resume prepared for a potential employer using lecture
materials, feedback received on your drafts, and the grading rubric.
2. Complete the Leadership Managment Style Self-Assessment, considering information
from the lecture on leading, managing and following, and the posted grading rubric.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete the Institute of Health Improvement (IHI) Open School course "QI 102 The
Model for Improvement: Your Engine for Change" using posted instructions.
2. Leadership Team Project: Work within your self-selected team on a service-learning
project (that has been approved by your instructor) to provide a service to some element of
the community. You will report on your planned project via a poster presentation early in
the semester and again towards the end of the semester. Each team will submit a 3 page
(minimum) paper describing the project, planning opportunities for leadership, and
outcome of the project. Full details are posted.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Yoder-Wise, P.S. . Leading and Managing in Nursing. 5th Edition. Mosby, 2011.
B. Wissman, J.. ATI Leadership and Managment Content Mastery Series Review Module. 5th
Edition. Assessmewnt Technologies Inc., 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Current Management Journals
B. Case Studies

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

