BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 43 - Neurological and Rehabilitation Nursing
Prerequisite(s): NSG 31, NSG 32, NSG 35, NSG 36 and NSG 37
Co-requisite(s): NSG 41, NSG 42, NSG 44, NSG 47 and NSG 49
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course provides a foundation in the study of nursing care and basic physiology and
pathophysiology related to clients experiencing disorders of the nervous system. Emphasis is on
client, family, and group centered care. This course also addresses biophysical, psychosocial, cultural,
and rehabilitation needs of adult clients. Students are introduced to principles and strategies for the
promotion of wellness. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the basic anatomy and physiology of the neurologic system.
B. Describe the pathophysiology, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and nursing care for clients with
disorders of the neurologic system.
C. Provide appropriate nursing care of clients with various neurologic disorders.
D. Utilize assessment and data gathering tools to gather information in both the paper and
electronic medical record, and plan a thorough physical assessment including recognition of
abnormal findings in the neurologic client.
E. Apply the principles and rationale for diagnostic lab and procedures specific to the client with
neurologic disorders.
F. Describe the classification, rationale, mode of action, side effects, contraindications, and nursing
considerations for medications ordered for the neurologic client.
G. Apply the principles of wellness to promote activities of health maintenance in clients with acute
and chronic neurologic problems.
H. Develop teaching plans appropriate to selected clients with neurologic problems, including
social, family, and cultural aspects.
I. Describe therapeutic communication techniques in the care of clients in both acute and
rehabilitation settings.
J. Describe appropriate principles and techniques of restorative nursing and rehabilitation.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Anatomy and Physiology of Nervous System
2. Neurological Assessment, Neurodiagnostic procedures
3. Acute intracranial Problems, Non-Traumatic: Problems of Increased
Inflammation, Brain Abscess, Brain Tumors, Rabies
4. Ischemic and hemmorhagic stroke
5. Chronic Neurologic Problems: Headache, Seizure Disorders, Parkinson's

Hours
4.00
4.00
6.00
5.00
8.00

5. Chronic Neurologic Problems: Headache, Seizure Disorders, Parkinson's
Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, Myasthenia Gravis, ALS, Alzheimer's disease,
Guillan Barre Syndrome, Special Senses
6. Neuro-Trauma and Rehabilitation
Total Hours

8.00

7.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Case Studies/Research Studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Homework
B. Class participation
C. Written Assignments
D. Written Examinations
E. Clinical Case Studies
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Lewis Chapter 56: p. 1441-1466: Nursing Assessment of the Neurologic System,
and Kozier: p. 646-651: Assessing the Neurologic System, Sensory Perception. Be
prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read the book: The Diving Bell and the Butterfly (an autobiography of a stroke victim
with locked-in syndrome). Be prepared to break into groups and discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the 5 scenarios of clients with neurologic disorders. For each scenario:
a. Read text on each diagnosis
b. Identify the four most important neurologic assessment for each client.
c. Describe how and why each assessment is performed.
Be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Book Report: On The Diving Bell and the Butterfly: complete assigned 2-3 page report on
nursing care issues for this client, considering his experience, compare to other clients,
and reflect how this narrative might change your nursing care. Include a complete nursing
care plan for this client. Be prepared to discuss in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete Chronic Neuro Problems Assignment. For each of the 5 chronic neurologic
problems:
a. Describe primary signs and symptoms, and pathophysiology of the problem.
b. List 3 important aspects of nursing assessment and care.
c. Write one complete nursing diagnosis and care plan in correct format.
Be prepared to discuss in small groups in class.
2. Complete the Traumatic Head Injury: Critical Thinking Exercise: Client in a motor
vehicle accident. Write a report using APA format, answer the four questions about the
client's continued care and assessment using critical thinking skills. Identify the top 3
nursing diagnoses. Be prepared to discuss this in class.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lewis, S. M., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S. R. . Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition.
Mosby, 2011.
B. Abrams, A.. Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales for Nursing Practice . 9th Edition. Lippincott,
2009.
C. Berman, A., Snyder, S, Kozier, B. & Erb, G.. Kozier and Erb's Fundamentals of Nursing. 8th
Edition. Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2008.
D. Carpentino-Moyet, L.. Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
E. Deglin, J., & Vallerand, A.. Davis' Drug Guide. 12th Edition. F.A. Davis, 2008.
F. Pagana, J. & Pagana, T.. Mosby's Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests. 2010 Edition.
Mosby, 2010.
G. Thomas, C., ed. Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary. 21st Edition. F.A. Davis, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 04/02/2012

