BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 78 - Clinical Nursing IV
Prerequisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 69, NSG 71
Co-requisite(s): NSG 74, NSG 77, NSG 79, NSG 81
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
272 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This course is an exploration of the various preventive and treatment methods used within
interdisciplinary settings for persons experiencing various psychosocial/development disorders.
Observation and participation in a variety of community mental health settings allows the student to
use the theory in supervised practice. In addition, students will utilize the nursing process to generate
nursing decisions in providing care in the hospital setting for adult clients with multiple system
disorders, unstable medical conditions, and critical health care disorders. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Formulate nursing diagnoses based on information gathered from a variety of sources.
B. Assess and evaluate in the clinical situation the combinations of signs, symptoms, diagnostic
data, and/or disturbed communication patterns that signal possible existence of multiple,
unstable and/or critical health care problems or psychopathology.
C. Formulate, plan and prioritize individualized care for clients based on nursing diagnoses.
D. Initiate and maintain care plans utilizing advanced nursing techniques to carry out nursing
measures and delegated medical techniques.
E. Evaluate effectiveness of nursing interventions and short-term goals to apply appropriate
modifications, based on assessment data, predetermined outcome criteria and ongoing client
responses to the care delivered by the nurse.
F. Maintain accurate, effective, and therapeutic written, verbal, and nonverbal communications
with clients, families, and members of the healthcare team, seeking guidance when appropriate.
G. Manage individualized care of clients utilizing theoretical principles of supervision and
management.
H. Participate in collaboration and referral to facilitate client's return to the community.
I. Utilize the nursing process to implement and evaluate formal and informal teaching for clients,
families, and communities in order to provide optimal nursing care to clients.
J. Provide care within legal and ethical parameters consistent with professional standards of
registered nursing practice consulting with other health care professionals and advocating for
clients when appropriate.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lab
Topics
1. Psychiatric Nursing/Mental Health
2. Adults with multiple systems disorders
3. Adults with unstable/critical care disorders

Hours
68.00
68.00
68.00

4. Management/Supervision
Total Hours

68.00
272.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Patient Care Experiences
B. Clinical Conferences
C. Clinical Simulations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Assignments
B. Clinical Observations and Conferences
C. Student self-evaluation and instructor evaluation of completion of
objectives, using a specific evaluation tool.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. After completion of the emergency department clinical experience, read a nursing journal
research article and write a critical appraisal of the article and compare the article to their
clinical experience.
2. Read chapter 6 in your mental health nursing textbook. Describe therapeutic and
non-therapeutic verbal communication techniques. Be prepared to discuss in small groups
in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Spend one day of clinical rotation in the medical-surgical area collecting data for the
"Critical Thinking Exercise". Use data collected to write a critical appraisal and
demonstrate understanding of key theoretical concepts addressed in NSG 77 and NSG 78.
2. Complete two reflective (self-assessment) writings during the mental health rotation.
Submit your writings by the assigned dates.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read ATI book version 5 and specific online nursing websites to answer clinical
objectives as homework for the leadership clinical rotation.
2. Develop and write up a formal patient teaching plan after collecting data observed during
the medical-surgical clinical experience. Teaching plans will be presented in
post-conference and submitted.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Carpentino-Moyet, L.. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
B. Smeltzer, S., Bare, B., Hinkle, J., & Cheever, K.. Brunner and Sudarth's Textbook of
Medical-Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
C. Townsend, M.. Essentials of Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing. 5th Edition. F.A. Davis, 2011.
D. Wissmann, J.. ATI Leadership and Management Content Series Review Module. Version 5
Edition. ATI, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders - IV, - available in clinical facilities.
B. Handbook of Rights for Mental Health Patients - available in clinical facilities.
C. Recommended references for mental Health clinical rotations - available in clinical facilities

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

