BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 60 - Maternity Nursing
Prerequisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 55, NSG 56, NSG 57
Co-requisite(s): NSG 62, NSG 63, NSG 66, NSG 70
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course prepares the Associate Degree Nursing student to care for clients in the maternity setting.
The focus is on family centered maternity nursing beginning in the prenatal period through the care of
the family in the postpartum period and care of the newborn. Using a nursing process approach, study
includes normal and high risk maternal care and normal and high risk infant care. In addition, content
related to the male and female reproductive system is addressed. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify principles of effective communication that demonstrate caring, sensitivity, and cultural
awareness for clients in maternal-newborn settings and with reproductive system disorders.
B. Describe the nursing and medical management for clients with reproductive system disorders.
C. Categorize principles of assessment based on functional health patterns for clients in
maternal-newborn settings and with reproductive system disorders.
D. Utilize critical decision making skills to discuss the health care for clients in maternal-newborn
settings and with reproductive system disorders.
E. Describe caring interventions for clients in maternal-newborn settings and with reproductive
system disorders.
F. List and describe principles of teaching and learning for clients in maternal-newborn settings
and with reproductive system disorders.
G. Describe the nursing and medical management for clients with low risk pregnancy, and labor,
and delivery.
H. Describe the nursing and medical management for clients with high risk pregnancy, and labor,
and delivery.
I. Describe nursing care and medical management for the low and high risk newborn.
J. Explain cultural care considerations for clients in the maternal-newborn setting, and with
reproductive disorders.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Assessment & Management: Male Reproductive Processes
2. Assessment & Management: Female Reproductive Processes
3. Human Reproduction
4. Pregnancy, Labor and Delivery
5. High Risk Pregnancy, Labor and Delivery
6. Postpartum and Newborn Care

Hours
4.50
4.50
3.00
9.00
4.00
6.00

7. High Risk Newborn Care
Total Hours

3.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the Agar scoring system in your textbook and be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read the degrees of episiotomies and/or lacerations in your textbook and relate the
information to a patient you have cared for.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the Pregnancy Worksheet using your textbook and other sources for reference.
2. Complete the Labor and Delivery Worksheet using your textbook and other sources for
reference.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the Pitocin Induction/Augmentation drip rate calculation. Be prepared to discuss
in class.
2. Research your assigned STD, and prepare your oral presentaions as assigned.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lilley, L & Aucker, R. Pharmacology and The Nursing Process. 6th Edition. St. Louis: Mosby.,
2011.
B. Carpentino-Moyet, L.J.. Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
C. Smeltzer, S. & Bare, B. Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition. Philadelphia:
Lippincott., 2010.
D. Ricci, S, & Kyle, T. Maternity and Pediatric Nursing. 9th Edition. Philadelhia: Lippincott,
Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
E. Gahart, B. & Nazaro, A. Intravenous Medications. 28 Edition. St Louis: Mosby, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

