BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 65 - Transition to ADN Nursing II
Prerequisite(s): Currently licensed as a Licensed Vocational Nurse
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course builds on the knowledge and skills acquired in NSG 64. The course expands the student’s
understanding of the registered nurse’s role as part of the health care team. Course content emphasizes
medical/surgical knowledge, competencies and skills essential for successful performance in the
second year of the ADN program. Clinical application of the registered nurse’s role will be
incorporated within the simulation environment. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate intermediate level nursing skills focusing on intravenous medication
administration, blood product administration and central line management skills.
B. Apply the nursing process to medical/surgical clients while participating in high fidelity
simulation.
C. Demonstrate techniques of RN level physical assessment and documentation while participating
in high fidelity simulation.
D. Apply concepts of critical thinking to medical/surgical clients while participating in high fidelity
simulation.
E. Compare and contrast the scope of practice and competencies for LVN and RN roles.
F. Develop intermediate level psychomotor skills applicable to registered nursing practice.
G. Describe the health care/nursing care needs of adult clients with specific medical-surgical issues
including cardiovascular, respiratory, endocrine, and fluid and electrolyte disorders.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. RN level skill development focusing on intravenous therapy and central line
management
2. Develop intermediate level psychomotor skills applicable to registered
nursing practice
3. Registered Nurse role development: Transition from LVN to RN role;
legal/ethical issues; nurse practice act
4. Nursing process related to the client with fluid and electrolyte abnormalities
utilizing high fidelity simulation
5. Nursing process related to the client with cardiovascular abnormalities
utilizing high fidelity simulation
6. Nursing process related to the client with respiratory abnormalities utilizing
high fidelity simulation
7. Nursing process related to the client with endocrine disorders utilizing high
fidelity simulation

Hours
4.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
6.00
4.00

8. Nursing process related to the client with selected complex
medical/surgical abnormalities utilizing high fidelity simulation
Total Hours

4.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. RN level skill development focusing on intravenous therapy and central line
management
2. Psychomotor skill development focusing on intermediate level registered
nursing skills
3. Nursing process related to the client with medical surgical
disorders utilizing high fidelity simulation
Total Hours

Hours
10.00
18.00
23.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. High fidelity simulation lab
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Group Participation
D. Class participation
E. Lab Projects
F. Final Examination
G. Written Assignments
H. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on diabetes management in the medical surgical text. Answer an
instructor prepared set of objectives covering the material.
2. In the medical surgical text, read the chapter on fluid and electrolyte balance. Come to
class prepared to discuss the reading.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the case study on a patient with gastrointestinal disorder. Utilize the nursing
care plan presented in class to complete the case study.
2. Select a nursing journal article discussing current evidence based practice guidelines for a
medical surgical disorder discussed in class. Write a critical appraisal of the article and
how to effectively implement guidelines into their role as a professional registered nurse.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Given a set of nursing skills, prepare to demonstrate mastery during skills lab testing.
2. Collaborate with a fellow student to develop and present a specific gastrointestinal

disorder to the class as a whole.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Smeltzer, S., Bare, B., Hinkle, J., Cheever, K.. Brunner & Suddarth's Textbook of
Medical-Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
B. Gahart, B.. Intravenous Medications. 27 Edition. Mosby, 2010.
C. Olsen, J.L., Giangrasso, A.P., & Shrimpton, D.. Medical Dosage Calculations. 9th Edition.
Prentice Hall, 2008.
D. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
E. Thomas, C.L.. Taber's cyclopedic medical dictionary. 21 Edition. F.A. Davis, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

