BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 66 - Clinical Nursing II
Prerequisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 55, NSG 56, NSG 57
Co-requisite(s): NSG 60, NSG 62, NSG 63, NSG 70
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
272 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This course provides directed clinical experiences in acute hospitals and agencies that provide services
for maternity, pediatric, perioperative and medical/surgical clients. Through the use of the nursing
process, the student will provide care, teaching, support, and rehabilitation to for maternity, pediatric,
perioperative and medical/surgical clients. Emphasis will be upon the role of the registered nurse in
caring for clients with acute and chronic problems, prevention of complications related to maternity,
pediatric, perioperative and medical/surgical clients, and client education. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply standards of professional practice in the clinical setting.
B. Plan effective therapeutic communication demonstrating caring, sensitivity, and cultural
awareness.
C. Utilize assessment techniques in the collection, analysis and synthesis of relevant client data.
D. Apply critical thinking skills in the decision making process in order to plan individualized
client care.
E. Provide direct client care based on the nursing process.
F. Formulate teaching/learning plans in the clinical setting.
G. Collaborate with the members of the healthcare team.
H. Choose effective management techniques through planning, organizing, and directing client
care.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lab
Topics
1. Perioperative Nursing Direct Patient Care Observations
2. Medical/Surgical Nursing
3. Pediatrics
4. Maternity
Total Hours

Hours
16.00
128.00
64.00
64.00
272.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Patient Care Assignments
B. Observations
C. Clinical Simulation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Assignments
B. Clinical Evaluations
C. Clinical Worksheets
D. Direct Observation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapters 19 and 20 in the med-surg textbook, using this information to identify the
different roles of the staff in the operating room. Discuss the responsibilities of each of
these roles during the patient's perioperative experience.
2. Read chapter 16 in the med-surg textbook. Develop a plan of care to manage major side
effects of chemotherapeutic agents for the oncology patient during an acute care
hospitalization.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After the two-day rotation in the operating room/PACU, write an APA fomat paper
discussing: roles of medical personnel in the OR/PACU, describe a surgery/procedure you
observed, identify 3 emergencies that can occur in PACU, and list two ways to maintain a
sterile field.
2. Attend the clinical day at the Alpine Home; examine personal reactions to nursing care of
the patient with Cerebral Palsy.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend the childbirth preparation class as assigned. Complete the APA paper according to
instructions.
2. Perform 5 pediatric assessments in the simulation lab and complete the associated
worksheets.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gahart & Nazareno. Intravenous Medications. 28th Edition. Mosby, 2011.
B. Pagana & Pagana. Mosby's Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. 4th Edition. Mosby,
2010.
C. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner and Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
D. Deglin, J.H. & Vallerand, A.H. . Davis’s Drug Guide . 12th Edition. F.A. Davis, 2009.
E. Ricci and Kyle. Maternity and Pediatric Nursing. 9th Edition. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins,
2009.
F. Carpentino-Moyet. Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
G. Olsen, J.L.. Medical Dosage Calculations. 9th Edition. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

