BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 54 - Foundations of Practice
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Associate Degree Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 55, NSG 56 and NSG 57
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course utilizes the conceptual framework of the nursing curriculum to provide the foundation for
nursing practice. Common threads integrated throughout the program are nursing process, nutrition,
medication administration, cultural diversity, communication and professional roles. Topics include an
introduction to nursing care, legal and ethical aspects, therapeutic communication, and concepts
underlying current professional practice. This course provides a foundation to prepare the student to
use critical thinking and the nursing process in providing direct patient care. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain standards of professional practice, including legal and ethical issues.
B. Demonstrate basic therapeutic communication.
C. Describe basic physical assessment of the adult patient.
D. Discuss the steps of the nursing process.
E. Discuss patient's values, cultural habits, and ethnicity and their effects on delivery of care.
F. Discuss the roles of each member of the healthcare team.
G. Discuss cost efficient strategies to delivery nursing care.
H. Demonstrate use of computer-assisted instruction.
I. Analyze the scientific basis for nursing practice.
J. Discuss physiologic health needs of adult patients.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Therapeutic Environment
2. Professional Role: Development
3. Physical Health Assessment
4. Physiologic Health I (Mobility, Immobility, Rest and Sleep, Pain
Management)
5. Nursing Process and documentation
6. Physiologic Health II (Fluid and Electrolyte Balance, Nutrition and
Oxygenation)
7. Medication Administrations
8. Skin Integrity and Wound Care
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
7.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
B. Demonstrations
C. Reading Assignments
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Lecture/Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Short papers
F. Computer assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in the "Fundamentals of Nursing" text on infection prevention and
control to answer instructor generated objectives. Come to class prepared to discuss these
objectives.
2. Review the reading on Evidenced Based Practice. Discuss the relationship of evidenced
based practice to quality of nursing practice.
B. Writing Assignments
1. "Use the California Board of Registered Nursing website to analyze the scope of practice
of the registered nursing in California." Write a 2 to 3 page paper using a question set
prepared by the instructor.
2. Describe the NCLEX RN test plan using the National Council of the State Boards of
Nursing website. Write a 2 to 3 page paper addressing areas of the test plan using an
instructor prepared question set.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Analyze a series of short patient case vignettes to determine fluid and electrolyte status of
each patient.
2. Correlate fluid balance assessment findings with medical disorders on an instructor
generated worksheet.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Potter, PA, Perry, AG. Fundamentals of Nursing. 7th Edition. Mosby, Elsevier, 2009.
B. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13 Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
C. Deglin JH, Vallerand, AH, and Sanoski, CA. Davis's Drug Guide for Nurses. 12 Edition. F.A.
Davis, 2011.
D. Olsen, J.H., Giagrasso, A.P., Shrimpton, D. Medical Dosage Calculations. 10th Edition. New
Jersey, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Basic Intermediate, and Advanced Skills; Mosby's Nursing Video Skills, student version, 2009

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 02/27/2012

