BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 18 - Fundamentals of Nursing
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Vocational Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 21, NSG 22, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course focuses on the client-centered study of fundamental nursing concepts applicable to all
clinical areas in vocational nursing. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe principles and procedures for client personal hygiene, comfort and safety in the setting
of a therapeutic environment, while observing patient rights.
B. Explain the principles and procedures for the assessment of vital signs measurements and
recognition of basic signs of life.
C. Discuss basic nursing measures designed to increase or maintain a client’s level of activity.
D. Describe the complications of immobility and nursing actions to prevent or control them.
E. Explain the concepts of skin integrity and basic nursing principles that promote healing and
maintain skin integrity.
F. Identify basic concepts of fluid, electrolyte, and acid base balance.
G. Discuss the nursing process related to pain control while recognizing the need to identify
cultural differences in pain perception.
H. Describe basic principles of planning and recording formats: Assessments, documentation, and
care planning.
I. Apply critical thinking processes to nursing assessment and care planning.
J. Identify the significance of the basic principles of infection control.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Therapeutic Environment
2.
Assessment
3.
Mobility/Immobility
4.
Vital Signs
5.
Wounds & Healing
6.
Fluid & Electrolytes
7.
Planning & Recording
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
7.00
6.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
10.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Group Participation
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read handout: "Fluid and Electrolyte Vocabulary". Be prepared to apply knowledge of
terms on course examination.
2. Read the text Kozier, Ch. 11: "Nursing Process, Critical Thinking, Data Collection".
Come to class prepared to discuss instructor generated objectives.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Care Plan Practice #1: Given a vignette of an adult client with a specific disease process
and assessment, complete the nursing process care planning form and identify nursing
diagnoses appropriate to the client.
2. Systems assessment and narrative charting practice: In groups of 4, have one student role
play a client while the other three assess the "client" using a systems assessment format.
Individually write a narrative assessment based on the data collected.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read handout "overview of acid-base imbalances" and related text in Kozier's. Complete
worksheet identifying the link between specific disease processes and their effect on
acid-base balance.
2. Review the handout "fluid and Electrolyte Review" and answer a 40 question handout.
Review questions in class prior to exam.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Abrams, A. C. . Clinical Drug Therapy: Rationales for Nursing Practice . 9th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
B. Deglin, J. H., & Vallerand, A. H. . Davis's Drug Guide . 12th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis,
2011.
C. Kozier, B., Erb, G, Berman, A. & Snyder, S.. Fundamentals of Nursing: Concepts, Process and
Practice. 9th Edition. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2012.
D. Pagana, J.D. and Pagana, T.J.. Mosby's Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests. 4th Edition.
Mosby, Elsevier, 2010.
E. Thomas, C. L. (Ed.). Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary . 18th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis, 2009.
F. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 02/27/2012

