BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 57 - Nursing Seminar: Theory Integration I
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Associate Degree Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 55 and NSG 56
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This course integrates theory and clinical learning experiences through the use of case study
evaluation and class discussion. Critical thinking skills, assessment skills, and nursing process will be
emphasized in a case study format. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply standards of professional practice in the planning of care for specific disease conditions
and describe possible legal, ethical and regulatory considerations that apply.
B. Communicate assessment information and plans of care in a professional manner.
C. Identify assessment information that can be used to develop a plan of care based on the nursing
process.
D. Develop an individualized plan of care based on the pathophysiological foundation of
disease/illness.
E. Identify the management strategies necessary to assist clients in maintaining, restoring, or
promoting health and wellness.
F. Discuss specific activities taking place in the clinical setting and their application to future
nursing care.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Case Study: Neurological Disorders
2. Case study: Renal Disorders and organizing care in the clinical setting
3. Case Study: Musculoskeletal Disorders
4. Case Study: Integumentary Disorders;Ethics in Nursing
5. Clinical Debriefing
6. Case Study: Nursing Process with a postoperativ patient
7. Case Study: Gastrointestinal Disorders
8. Application of critical thinking to the clinical environment
9. Prioritizing nursing care in the clinical environment
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Student presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Class participation
C. Written in-class assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout on pathophysiology of pressure ulcers and be prepared to discuss in
class related to an instructor generated case study.
2. "Read the pathophysiology on pyelonephritis in the Medical Surgical" text and be
prepared to discuss in class related to an instructor generated case study.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write two complete priority nursing diagnostic statements from post operative case study.
2. Write a compete care plan with nursing diagnostic statement, goals and nursing
interventions from neurological case study.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Develop a "Nurse Brain" as described in class to organize your hospital patient care
assignment.
2. Prepare to administer medications contained in the neurological case study using the
assigned drug guide and dimensional analysis.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner & Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
Lippincott, 2010.
B. Deglin JH, Vallerand, AH, and Sanoski, CA. Davis’s Drug Guide for Nurses. 12th Edition. F.A.
Davis, 2009.
C. Lilley. L.L., Harrington, S., & Snyder, J.S. Pharmacology and The Nursing Process. 6th Edition.
Mosby, Elsevier, 2011.
D. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 02/27/2012

