BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 70 - Theory Integration Seminar II
Prerequisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 55, NSG 56, NSG 57
Co-requisite(s): NSG 60, NSG 62, NSG 63, NSG 66
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

In this course students will integrate critical thinking skills and didactic content to clinical case studies
in maternity, pediatric and acute medical surgical nursing content. The student will clarify roles and
develop plans of care for clients throughout the lifespan. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and analyze the steps of the nursing process through clinical case studies in maternity,
pediatric and acute medical-surgical nursing.
B. Demonstrate physical assessment techniques for the medical surgical, pediatric and maternity
client.
C. Analyze arterial blood gas results for the medical surgical client.
D. Describe types of intravenous (IV) fluids, and how they are used with various disease processes.
E. Discuss treatment modalities for the client with Type I and Type II diabetes.
F. Demonstrate nursing care measures during a pediatric emergency.
G. Describe the steps of developmental assessment of children.
H. Analyze fetal heart monitor tracings, and describe the associated nursing interventions required.
I. Compare and contrast nursing care of the low risk and high risk labor patient.
J. Demonstrate administration techniques for Pitocin and Magnesium Sulfate infusions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) interpretation for the acute medical surgical
client
2. IV fluid administration
3. Management of the cardiovascular client
4. Type I and Type II diabetes management
5. Care of the special needs child
6. Nursing management of the dying child
7. Developmental assessment of children
8. Pediatric emergencies
9. Fetal heart monitoring, interpretation and nursing care
10. Low and high risk labor and delivery nursing care
11. Magnesium Sulfate and Pitocin administration
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Class Activities
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Case studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Demonstration
C. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on Arterial Blood Gas Interpretation in your textbook. Answer the
questions at the end of the chapter. Be prepared to discuss answers in class.
2. Read the chapter on Pitocin administration in your maternity textbook. Be prepared to
calculate Pitcocin intravenous drip rates in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the Hospitalized Pediatric Client Case Study, submit it on assigned due date and
be prepared to discuss the case study in class.
2. Complete the Diabetes Worksheet, submit it on assigned due date, and be prepared to
discuss in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe nursing care of a patient receiving Pitocin in the clinical setting. Write and
submit a summary of your observations.
2. Research a professional journal article on pediatric respiratory distress. Be prepared to
discuss in small groups in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gahart, B, & Nazaro, A.. Intravenous Medications. 28th Edition. St. Luois: Mosby, 2011.
B. Kyle, T, & Carman, S.. Essentials of Pediatric Nursing. 2nd Edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
Williams & Wilkins, 2013.
C. Lilley, L. & Aucker, R.. Pharmacology and the Nursing Process. 6th Edition. St. Louis: Mosby,
2011.
D. Carpentino-Moyet, L. J.. Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
E. Smeltzer, S. & Bare, B. . Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, 2010.
F. Littleton-Gibbs, L. & Engebretson. Maternity Nursing Care. 2nd Edition. Clifton Park: Delmar,
2013.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

