BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 63 - Pediatric Nursing
Prerequisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 55, NSG 56, NSG 57
Co-requisite(s): NSG 60, NSG 62, NSG 66, NSG 70
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course prepares the Associate Degree Nursing student to care for clients in the pediatric setting.
The focus is on family centered pediatric nursing beginning in the newborn period through the care of
the adolescent child. Using the nursing process approach, the course will include normal and high risk
newborn and infant care, normal child health care, and acute pediatric care. In addition, content related
to the child at risk will be addressed.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Contrast normal growth and development in the newborn, infant, toddler, pre-school, school age
and adolescent client.
B. Describe the nursing and medical management for common newborn and childhood conditions
C. Discuss nursing care and medical management for common developmental, cardiac, respiratory,
gastrointestinal, neurological, musculoskeletal, genitourinary, endocrine, immunologis,
neoplastic, integumentary, infectious, mental health, and chromosomal abnormalities in the
pediatric population.
D. Apply principles of assessment based on functional health patterns for clients in the pediatric
setting.
E. Utilize critical decision making skills to discuss the health care for clients in the pediatric
setting.
F. Plan caring, developmentallly appropriate interventions for clients in the pediatric setting.
G. Prepare patient education tools for children and parents in the pediatric setting.
H. Create nursing care plans that incorporate principles of communication and cultural care for
children and their families.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Health Assessment, Medications and IV Therapy, Hospitalized Child,
Health Supervision
2. Health Promotion and the Infant, Toddler, Pre-School, School-Age, and
Adolescent Client
3. Disorders: Respiratory, and Eyes and Ears
4. Disorders: Gastrointestinal, Genitourinary, Neurologic, Neuromuscular, and
Musculoskeletal
5. Disorder: Cardiovascular, Hematologic, Endocrine, Neoplastic,
Immunologic, Integumentary, Mental Health
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
4.00
8.00
10.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Case studies
E. Blackboard Modules/Assignments
F. Worksheets
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Use pediatric textbook and resources on Blackboard to plan care for the pediatric client
demonstrating knowledge of developmental issues in Pediatrics: communication,
teaching, approaching the child during physical assessment, child's reaction to
hospitalization.
2. Use Pediatric textbook and resources on Blackboard to differentiate between the adult and
the pediatric client in regard to seizures and epilepsy in Pediatrics.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete Asthma case study.
2. Complete Cystic Fibrosis case study.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete Blackboard Learning Module:Formulate plans for Health Supervision visits in
Pediatrics.
2. Complete Blackboard Learning Module: Classify and Describe Infectious Diseases in
Pediatrics.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lilley & Auker. Pharmacology & The Nursing Process. 6th Edition. Mosby, 2011.
B. Smeltzer and Bare. Brunner & Suddarth's textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
C. Carpentino-Moyet, L.. Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
D. Ricci, S., Kyle, T.. Maternity and Pediatric Nursing. 1st Edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
Williams & Wilkins, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

