BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 37 - Endocrine Disorders
Prerequisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 21, NSG 22, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Co-requisite(s): NSG 31, NSG 32, NSG 35 and NSG 36
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course covers basic nursing process, basic physiology, pathophysiology, medical care,
complications, and nursing care related to clients experiencing disorders of the endocrine system.
Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Distinguish between the types of diabetes, their pathophysiology, causes, complications, medical
treatment and nursing care.
B. Discuss the diagnostic tests associated with endocrine disorders and nursing care related to them.
C. Apply the nursing process in the care of clients with endocrine disorders.
D. Compare and contrast disorders of the endocrine system.
E. Explain the types of medications used to treat endocrine disorders, their action and side effects.
F. Describe the precise location of endocrine glands in the human body, the function of the
hormones they secrete, and their function, and the symptoms of hypoactivity and hyperactivity
of these glands.
G. Utilize the nursing process, identify basic overt and covert needs of these clients, plan and
initiate nursing measures to meet these needs, then evaluate the status of identified client needs
and the effectiveness of care provided.
H. Apply teaching principles to clients with endocrine disorders and initiate health education
(culture sensitive) for the client and his/her family and identify community health resources
available to the client.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Diabetes overview/pathophysiology
2. Diagnostic tests
3. Management of diabetes mellitus (diet, exercise, medications, client
teaching)
4. Complications
5. Long term effects (complications)
6. Endocrine
7. Pituitary Disorders
8. Adrenal Disorders
9. Thyroid Disorders

Hours
3.00
2.00
8.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

10. Parathyroid, thymus, and pineal disorders
11. Putting it all Together
Total Hours

2.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Team Projects
F. Self-directed learning projects
G. Case studies/research studies
H. Guest speaker with Industry Expertise
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Chapter 23 in your medical surgical book and be prepared to discuss the
complications of diabetes in class.
2. Read an article on teaching diabetic clients and be prepared to share this information with
your classmates.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page summary on the types of diabetes. Be prepared to discuss in small
groups in class.
2. Compare and contrast hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, and be prepared to discuss in
class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend one free community diabetic teaching class. Discuss this educational opportunity
with your classmates in class.
2. Research one well known personality who has an endocrine disorder and how it has
impacted their life. Be prepared to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Deglin, J., & Vallerand, A. . Davis's Drug Guide . 12th Edition. F. A. Davis., 2009.
B. Abrams, A. . Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales for Nursing Practice . 9th Edition. Lippincott,
2009.
C. Carpentino-Moyet, L.. Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
D. Kozier, B., Erb, G., Blais, K., & Wilkinson, J. M. . Fundamentals of Nursing: Concepts,
Process, and Practice. 8th Edition. Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2009.
E. Lewis, S., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S. R.. Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition. Mosby,
2011.
F. Pagana, K., & Pagana, T.. Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. 4th Edition. Mosby,
2010.

G. Thomas, C. (Ed.). Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary. 22nd Edition. F. A. Davis, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 04/02/2012

