BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 201 - Certified Nurses Aide Basic Nursing Care, Clinical
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): NSG 200
Recommended Prep: Reading Level II; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: NT
153 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course provides the necessary laboratory and clinical experience for development of skills and
competencies in basic nursing for a Certified Nurse's Aide (CNA). Successful completion provides the
required laboratory/clinical experience necessary to qualify for the Written and Manual Skills testing
for State Certification. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Provide safe and competent personal care of patients and nursing procedures in long-term care
consistent with the role of the Nursing Assistant.
B. Apply measures for safety, cleanliness, and infection control in the long-term setting.
C. Respond appropriately to individuals and occurrences associated with long-term care settings.
D. Provide emotional support, physical care, nutrition, and rehabilitation to clients.
E. Apply knowledge of common diseases/conditions associated with long-term care clients and the
CNA level of care needed for these clients.
F. Utilize knowledge of client's rights and moral and ethical aspects of the CNA role in the
delivery of care.
G. Apply basic math formulas in the clinical setting.
H. Document all of the care provided to clients in a complete and professional manner.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lab
Topics
1. Patient Rights
2. Prevention and Management of Catastrophe and Unusual Occurrences
3. Body Mechanics
4. Medical Surgical Asepsis
5. Weights and Measures
6. Patient Care Skills
7. Patient Care Procedures
8. Vital Signs
9. Nutrition
10. Emergency Procedures
11. Rehabilitation Nursing
12. Observation and Charting

Hours
1.00
1.00
4.00
8.00
2.00
44.00
20.00
8.00
6.00
1.00
4.00
6.00

13. Individualized Clinical Experiences
14. Laboratory Skills Practice
Total Hours

10.00
38.00
153.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Demonstrations
B. Multimedia Presentations
C. Instructor-supervised nursing activities
D. Observation experiences
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Return Demonstrations
B. Teacher-Student conference
C. Client care
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in your textbook regarding care of the client with chronic disease. Be
prepared to discuss in class..
2. Read an article on catheter care and explain why this procedure is critical to prevent
infection.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write up documentation of the sample client in less than 15 minutes.
2. Write up a description of a wound and relate it to a specific client you have cared for.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Working in a group, present an oral report on death and dying.
2. Research community long term care facilities and their cost to the client. Be prepared to
discuss in small groups in post-conference.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Fuzy, J., & Leahy, W.. The home health aide handbook. 1st Edition. Hartman, 2011.
B. Carter, P.. Lippincott's nursing assistants: A humanistic approach to caregiving. 3rd Edition.
Lippincott, 2012.
C. Carter, P.. Lippincott's nursing assistants: A humanistic approach to caregiving workbook. 3rd
Edition. Lippincott, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Lippincott's Video Series for Nursing Assistants: Carter, P. 2012

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 04/16/2012

