BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 55 - Medical Surgical Nursing I
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Associate Degree Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 56 and NSG 57
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the pathophysiological foundations of health and disease and introduces the role
of the nursing process in the maintenance, restoration and promotion of health. Emphasis is placed on
developing familiarity with the role of the professional nurse: gathering information, formulating
nursing diagnoses, planning interventions, implementation or care, medication administration, and
evaluation of outcomes. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe standards of professional practice and define legal, ethical, and regulatory
considerations in the delivery of care.
B. Identify how disease and illness affects the ability to communicate.
C. Describe how to perform both a comprehensive and focused functional health assessment.
D. Identify assessment information that can be used to develop a plan of care based on the nursing
process.
E. Describe how to adapt the plan of care to respect cultural values, customs, and habits.
F. Apply the nursing process to various disease conditions.
G. Develop an individualized plan of care based on pathophysiological foundation of
disease/illness.
H. Discuss life span considerations, the nursing process and dosage calculation in the
administration of medications.
I. Describe the nursing role in supporting collaboration between professional health care
providers, clients and family.
J. Identify the management strategies necessary to assist clients in maintaining, restoring or
promoting health and wellness.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Legal Ethical Considerations
2. Error Prevention
3. Over the Counter and Herbal preparations
4. Life Span Considerations
5. Pharmacological Principles
6. Dosage calculations
7. Nursing care for a client with skin disorders
8. Nursing care caring for a client with musculoskeletal disorders

Hours
2.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
8.00
4.00
6.00

9. Nursing care for a client with gastrointestinal disorders
10. Nursing care for a client with urinary elimination disorders
11. Nursing care for a client with altered sensation/mobility from a cerebral
vascular accident.
12. Nursing care for a client with diminished oxygen, cardiovascular cause,
congestive heart failure
13. Nursing care for a client with diminished oxygen, respiratory cause,
pneumonia.
Total Hours

8.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. In the assigned medical/surgical nursing textbook, read the chapter on patients with
coronary vascular disorders. Come to class prepared to discuss the reading.
2. In the assigned medical/surgical nursing textbook, read the chapter on assessment of
respiratory function. Answer an instructor prepared set of objectives.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 2 to 3 page paper using APA format describing an aspect of medication errors as
described in a class handout.
2. Write a 3 to 4 page paper on Tuberculosis using APA format, addressing assessment,
signs and symptoms, and medications used to treat TB.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Given a set of medication orders, select appropriate syringes and needles to be used to
administer the medications.
2. Set up a teaching plan to help patients learn to correctly take medications when needing to
convert one set of measurements to another.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lilley. L.L., Harrington, S., & Snyder, J.S. Pharmacology and The Nursing Process. 6th Edition.
Mosby, Elsevier, 2011.
B. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner & Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
Lippincott, 2010.
C. Olsen, J.L., Giangrasso, A.P., & Shrimptom, D. Medical Dosage Calculations. 10th Edition.
Prentice Hall, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 02/27/2012

