BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 36 - Gastrointestinal and Renal/Urinary Nursing
Prerequisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 21, NSG 22, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Co-requisite(s): NSG 31, NSG 32, NSG 35 and NSG 37
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course provides the student with the tools to use critical thinking skills in application of
knowledge in the pathophysiology and nursing care of clients with disorders of the gastrointestinal and
renal/urinary systems. Emphasis will be placed on individualized care and teaching of the client and
family will focus on biophysical and rehabilitation needs, as well as cultural and psychosocial
influences. A brief review of medications appropriate to each disease process will be integrated into
the lecture. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe anatomy and physiology of the gastrointestinal system (including accessory organs),
and renal/urinary system.
B. Describe the pathophysiology, symptoms, disgnosis, treatment, and nursing care for clients with
disorders of the gastrointestinal/renal/urinary systems.
C. Utilize assessment and data-gathering tools to gather information in both paper and electronic
medical record, and plan a thorough physical assessment including recognition of abnormal
findings in the gastrintestinal/renal/urinary client.
D. Explain the principles of and rationale for diagnostic lab and procedures.
E. Describe the classification, rationale, mode of action, side effects, contraindications, and nursing
considerations for medications ordered for gastrointestinal/renal/urinary clients.
F. Define medical terms used in relation to gastrointestinal/renal/urinary clients.
G. Describe the implications of fluid and electrolyte imbalances as related to
gastrointestinal/renal/urinary disorders.
H. Apply concepts of complex nursing care (including preventative and supportive) for
gastrointestinal/renal/urinary clients.
I. Demonstrate the ability, using the critical thinking process, to apply didactic knowledge to
clinical situations to provide appropriate nursing care of clients various
gastrointestinal/renal/urinary disorders.
J. Develop teaching plans appropriate to selected gastrointestinal/renal/urinary clients, including
social, family, and cultural aspects.
K. Choose appropriate nursing diagnoses, then demonstrate the ability to formulate nursing care
plans including measurable goals, nursing interventions, nursing outcomes, and evaluation of
care of gastrointestinal/renal/urinary clients.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Review of normal anatomy and physiology of the gastrointestinal system,
and common disorders.

Hours
5.00

2. Disorders of the upper GI tract.
3. Disorders of the lower GI tract.
4. Review of normal anatomy and physiology of the accessory organs,
including assessment and data collection.
5. Disorders of the accessory organs.
6. Review of normal anatomy and physiology of the renal/urinary system,
including assessment and data collection.
7. Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base issues as related to the renal system.
8. Disorders of the renal/urinary system.
Total Hours

3.00
6.00
3.00
5.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Discussion
C. Audio Visual Aids
D. Case studies/research studies
E. Homework: Students are expected to spend a minimum of two hours outside of class each week
for each hour of lecture doing homework, reading the text, and completing research projects.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Written Assignments
E. Class Presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read handouts: Diagnostic tests (GI client), Endoscopic Procedures, GI tubes to prepare
yourself prior to your rotation in the GI lab.
2. Read Lewis, et al: Chapter 45: Assessment of the Urinary System. Apply these concepts
to your care of a client with a urinary disorder.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the GI case study. Answer the 10 questions and relate answers to actual clients
you have cared for.
2. Complete the Accessory Organ Assignment. Complete 2 nursing care plans regarding one
of the two scenarios.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Group Assignment: Review Fluid/Electrolyte/Acid Base Handouts, and complete the
assigned worksheet. In your group discuss the importance of monitoring fluid and
electrolyte balance with your clients.
2. Complete the GI medications worksheet based on one of your past clients.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Abrams, A. . Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales for Nursing Practice . 9th Edition. Philadelphia:
J. B. Lippincott, 2009.
B. Deglin, J., & Vallerand, A. . Davis's Drug Guide . 13th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis, 2009.
C. Carpentino-Moyet, L. . Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.

Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
D. Lewis, S., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S. . Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition. St. Louis:
C.V. Mosby, 2011.
E. Pagana & Pagana. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic & Laboratory Test. 4th Edition. Spring
House, 2010.
F. Thomas, C. . Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary . 21st Edition. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis,
2009.
G. Berman, A., Snyder, S., Kozier, B., & Erb, G.. Kozier and Erb's Fundamentals of Nursing. 8th
Edition. New Jersey: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 02/27/2012

