BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 71 - Theory Integration Seminar III
Prerequisite(s): Admission to the ADN Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 69
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

In this course students will integrate critical thinking skills and didactic content to clinical case studies,
in-depth physical assessment skills in gerontology, chronic illness and community/home nursing. The
student will clarify roles and expectations in rehabilitation/supportive health care and community
setting. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze the roles of the nurse as a care provider, advocate, and manager in the
rehabilitation/supportive health care and community setting using a case study approach.
B. Demonstrate advanced physical assessments of the geriatric client, clients with acute and
chronic illnesses and in the community/home care setting.
C. Identify and describe community resources appropriate for assisting the elderly/disabled in the
community.
D. Apply the nursing process and nursing knowledge to selected case studies.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Senior/Community Services
2. Assessment: Community and Geriatric Settings
3. Culture in the Community
4. Community Resources
5. The Aging Adult
6. Geriatric Conditions
7. Assessing Information and Resources
8. Integrative Exercises: Case Studies
9. Assessment Skills: Evaluation of Laboratory Values Discussion/ Case
Studies
10. Cardiovascular Assessment Dysrhythmia Recognition
11. Pain Assessment
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Case Studies
E. Focused Assessment Skills
F. Video/Discussion
G. Group Activities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Gerontology/Community Health (50%)
Medical Surgical Nursing (50%)
B. Class Presentations
C. Case Studies/Worksheet
D. Physical Assessment Skills
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapters in the Community based nursing and Gerontology texts on culture and
family care. Be prepared to complete an in class case study using the readings as
background.
2. Read the article on pain assessment and management in persons with dementia. Answer an
instructor generated set of objectives based on the article.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Given a set of death and dying case studies, share your thoughts and feelings with four
class mates. Each student will write a one page paper with their thoughts and feelings.
Review each of these papers and make a three paragraph written response. Evaluation will
focus on the relationship of the initial paper and the responses to material presented in
class.
2. Given a specific cardiac disorder, work in groups of three to summarize the nursing care
for patients with the disorder. Use the information to fill in an instructor generated
worksheet to be distributed to the class as a study guide.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete the worksheet analyzing arterial blood gasses (ABG). Bring the worksheet to
class to use to analyze the ABG status of a series of case vignettes.
2. Visit a local community resource related to health care. Interview an administrator and
review written pamphlets, web site, etc. Write a summary of the community resource
focusing on services, population served, and funding.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Pagana & Pagana. Manual of Diagnostic & Laboratory Test. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby, 2001.
B. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner & Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 10th Edition.
J.B. Lippincott Co, 2003.
C. Eliopoulos, C.. Gerontologic Nursing. 7th Edition. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
D. Hunt, R.. Introduction to Community Based Nursing. 4th Edition. Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:

A. Selected seminar case studies.
B. Physical Assessment and data interpretation tools.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

