BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 67 - Complex Medical/Surgical Nursing III
Prerequisite(s): Admission to ADN Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 68, NSG 69, NSG 71
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course addresses the nursing of adult and geriatric clients with acute and chronic illnesses is
addressed. Students study common chronic and acute illnesses, adaptation to, and acute episodes of
these illnesses in the acute hospital setting. Physical assessment of the adult, normal development and
physiology, nutrition, pharmacology, sexuality, cultural factors, and prevention and early detection
measures appropriate to the various nursing problems are discussed. Nursing process to promote
adaptation is stressed throughout the course. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Utilize nursing assessment skills to formulate nursing diagnoses for clients with acute or chronic
health care problems in order to assist clients in maintaining and promoting adaptation.
B. Describe the pathophysiology, medical diagnosis, and treatment, including pharmacology and
nutritional aspects of adult and geriatric clients with acute or chronic health care problems.
C. Describe nursing interventions and advanced nursing techniques used in the care of clients with
acute and chronic health problems.
D. Describe methods of prevention and early detection used to obtain and maintain health in clients
at risk for development of acute or chronic health care problems.
E. Propose criteria for evaluating effectiveness of nursing interventions and the need for change in
the care plan.
F. Identify and evaluate factors including developmental level, sexuality, and cultural diversity that
affect the ability of clients and families to adapt to acute, chronic, and terminal illness and to the
health care setting.
G. Prioritize nursing care based on acuity of client's nursing diagnoses related to adaptation and
health.
H. Describe the professional role of the nurse including collaboration with health care providers,
professional communication skills, legal and ethical parameters and client advocacy related to
the care of clients with acute and chronic health care problems.
I. Develop formal and informal teaching plans for clients, staff, and families in order to provide
optimal care for clients with acute or chronic health care problems.
J. Describe community resources available to assist clients and families in dealing with acute or
chronic health care problems after discharge from the health care agency.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Physical Assessment of adult clients
2. Intravenous Theory/ Blood administration
3. Nursing care of adults with a cardiovascular disorder

Hours
4.00
2.00
14.00

4. Nursing care of adults with respiratory disorders
5. Nursing care of adults in pain
Total Hours

12.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Student Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Written Assignments
D. Written Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Brunner's, Chapter 25 "Noninvasive Respiratory Therapies" and be prepared to
discuss the rationale and use of oxygen therapy.
2. Review Brunner's chart 28-6 "Assessing for Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) or
Myocardial Infarction (MI)" and be prepared to discuss the non-cardiac signs and
symptoms of each.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay describing the impact of COPD on a patient's life. Be prepared to discuss
these concepts in class in small groups.
2. Write a 2 page paper comparing and contrasting the various treatment modalities for
ACS/MI. Be prepared to discuss in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare a poster presentation on the anatomy of the heart. Present this poster in class.
2. Prepare a teaching plan for a patient with a new diagnosis of tuberculosis. Be prepared to
discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner & Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
J.B. Lippincott , 2010.
B. Urden, L., Stacy, K., & Lough, M. . Critical Care Nursing. 6th Edition. Mosby, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

