BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 62 - Medical-Surgical Nursing II
Prerequisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 55, NSG 56, NSG 57
Co-requisite(s): NSG 60, NSG 63, NSG 66, NSG 70
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course explores concepts and challenges in client management in acute and chronic illness.
Topics include perioperative care, fluid and electrolyte balance and disturbances, parenteral therapy,
oncology, and diabetes. Focus is on the care of clients with acute and chronic problems, and client
education. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify principles of effective communication that demonstrate caring, compassion, and
cultural awareness.
B. Discuss care of the perioperative client with acute and chronic disorders emphasizing client
education.
C. Describe the nursing and medical management for clients with oncologic, hematologic,
immunologic and diabetic problems.
D. Discuss principles of assessment based on functional health patterns for clients with oncologic,
hematologic, immunologic and diabetic problems.
E. Utilize critical decision making skills to discuss the health care for clients with oncologic,
hematologic, immunologic and diabetic problems.
F. Describe caring interventions for clients with oncologic, hematologic, immunologic and diabetic
problems.
G. Apply principles of teaching and learning for clients with oncologic, hematologic, immunologic
and diabetic problems.
H. Differentiate between the care for clients with acute and chronic health problems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Fluid and Electrolyte Balance and Disturbances a. Review key concepts,
fluid and electrolyte balance - 4 hours b. Fluid and electrolyte disturbances
and imbalances, acid base balance - 4 hours c. IV therapy, IV fluids,
complications of parenteral therapy - 4 hours
2. Nursing Management of the Client with Cancera. Epidemiology,
pathophysiology of the malignant process - 3 hours. Detection and
prevention, diagnosis - 3 hours. Major cancers: breast, lung, colorectal,
prostate - 3 hours. Management of cancer: curgery, chemotherapy, radiation
- 3 hours. Nursing care of cancer patients, end of life care - 3 hours
3. Nursing management of the Client with Diabetes. Classification of diabetes -

Hours
13.00

15.00

13.00

3. Nursing management of the Client with Diabetes. Classification of diabetes 2 hours. Diabetes managemnt - 3 hours. Clinical care issues with the diabetic
patient - 3 hours. Long-term and acute complications of diabetes - 4 hours
4. Managment of the Perioperative Client a. Perioperative phases, informed
consent surgical team - 3 hours b. Surgical asepsis, anesthesia, lab values 3 hours c. Nursing care post-op, prevention post-op complications - 4 hours
Total Hours

13.00

10.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Discussion
C. Demonstrations
D. (Unless otherwise stated, this course is conducted according to the general policies, procedures,
and schedule of the Associate Degree Nursing Program described in the ADN student
handbook.)
E. Class projects
F. Computer assisted instruction
G. Homework: Students are expected to spend the minimum of two hours outside of class each
week for each hour of lecture doing homework, reading the text, and completing written
assignments.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Written Assignments
D. In class assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter 18, focusing on the 3 phases of the perioperative experience: preoperative,
intraoperative, and postoperative.
2. Read chapter 14, identifying the 4 pH imbalances (metabolic acidosis and alkalosis;,
respiratory acidosis and alkalosis) and their common causes.
3. Read chapter 41, identifying the classification of diabetes according to their
pathophysiology.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Develop a worksheet based on the treatment modalities for diabetes.
2. Read a case study presentation based on orthopedic traumatic injury. Using APA format,
answer the 5 critical thinking questions using supportive textbooks as references.
3. Perform 20 dosage calculations for continuous IV infusions of medications ordered by
mcg/Kg/min.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In small groups, answer a question based on a clinical scenario presented in class. Share
the group answer with the rest of the class.
2. Review a teaching plan for the patient undergoing chemotherapy.
3. Allow time for each student to review lecture notes for diabetic care. In class review
critical information for patients to learn regarding diabetic care issues.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Pagana & Pagana. Mosby's Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. 24th Edition. St Louis:

Mosby, 2010.
B. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner and Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
C. Carepntino -Moyet. Nursing Diagnosis, Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

