BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 35 - Cardiovascular and Respiratory Nursing
Prerequisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 21, NSG 22, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Co-requisite(s): NSG 31, NSG 32, NSG 36 and NSG 37
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the nursing process related to adult clients experiencing disorders of
the respiratory, cardiovascular, hematologic, and immune systems. Pathophysiology and medical
treatment of diseases of the respiratory, cardiovascular, and immune systems are addressed. Graded
only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the basic pathophysiology of the respiratory, cardiovascular, hematologic, and immune
systems.
B. Utilize the nursing process to care for adults experiencing respiratory, cardiovascular,
hematologic, and immune system disorders.
C. Describe nursing skills applicable to the nursing care of adults with respiratory, cardiovascular,
hematologic, and immune system disorders.
D. Explain health maintenance strategies related to respiratory, cardiovascular, hematologic, and
immune conditions.
E. Formulate teaching plans for patients with cardiovascular or respiratory disorders to optimize
health based on health principles.
F. Discuss cultural needs of individuals with respiratory, cardiovascular, hematologic, and immune
disorders.
G. Describe the assessment, diagnosis and treatment of respiratory, cardiovascular, hematologic,
and immune system disorders.
H. Describe safe nursing administration of drugs used to treat cardiovascular, respiratory,
hematologic, and immune system disorders.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Hematology
2.
Immune System
3.
Cardiovascular System
4.
Respiratory System
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
9.00
18.00
16.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on hypertensive disorders in the medical surgical nursing text. Answer
instructor prepared objectives. Come to class prepared to discuss the objectives.
2. Read the chapter on obstructive pulmonary diseases in the medical surgical nursing text.
Answer instructor prepared objectives. Come to class prepared to discuss the objectives.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a teaching plan using a case study of a patient at high risk for human
immunodifficiency virus exposure focusing on prevention and transmission.
2. Write a 2 to 3 page paper describing normal blood flow through the heart and evaluating
the effects of abnormal valve function on patient status.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete a worksheet of common cardiac dysrhythmias identifing the rate and rhythm
and typical treatments for each.
2. Complete worksheet evaluating normal and abnormal arterial blood gasses. Utilize criteria
and examples discussed in class for evaluation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Lewis, S.M., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S.R. . Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition. St.
Louis: C.V. Mosby, 2011.
B. Abrams, A.C.. Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales for Nursing Practice. 9th Edition. Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
C. Deglin JH, Vallerand, AH, and Sanoski, CA. Davis’s Drug Guide for Nurses. 12th Edition. F.A.
Davis, 2011.
D. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 04/02/2012

