BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 49 - Role Development and Vocational Relations/Leadership
Prerequisite(s): NSG 31, NSG 32, NSG 35, NSG 36 and NSG 37
Co-requisite(s): NSG 41, NSG 42, NSG 43, NSG 44 and NSG 47
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course provides an overview of the role of a nurse manager/supervisor and leader in a structured
setting. The focus is on the development of the basic skills that facilitate the management process.
Career opportunities, employer/employee relationships and responsibilities, as well as professional
expectations are explored. This course will also provide an overview of nursing history, theory, legal
and ethical concerns, and scope of practice of the LVN. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explore the role/defining characteristics of a leader and a manager.
B. Apply principles of decision making/critical thinking, delegation, and time management.
C. Apply principles regarding conflict resolution, change, feedback and evaluation with employees.
D. Describe the principles of Total Quality Management.
E. Analyze health care delivery, structure, budget, and reimbursement.
F. Describe and apply job seeking skills.
G. Explore key elements of nursing history, theory, and trends in nursing.
H. Compare and contrast legal concepts in nursing.
I. Debate and apply the principles of ethics in nursing.
J. Describe the scope of practice for the Licensed Vocational Nurse.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Managers and Leaders
2. Decision Making, Delegation, and Time Management
3. Conflict Resolution, Change, and Feedback and Evaluation
4. Total Quality Management
5. Health Care Delivery, Structure, Budget and Reimbursement
6. Career Opportunities and Responsibilities
7. Nursing History, Theory, and Trends
8. Ethical Issues in Nursing
9. Legal Issues in Nursing
10. Scope of Practice for the Licensed Vocational Nurse
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Team Projects
F. Case studies/research studies
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter 7 from Ellis about Patient Advocacy. Be prepared to discuss this topics in
class.
2. Read the article "Pain Assessment and Managment in Persons with Dementia", by Al
Horgas and Lois Miller. Be prepared to discuss this article in small groups in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the "Ethical Case Study". Describe in 4-6 paragraphs what what you treatment
plan will be for a child with cancer. Be prepared to discuss this in small groups in class.
2. Share and submit your feelings and thoughts in a two page paper concerning the death and
dying case studies that were shared in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In small groups, choose a charitable or non-profit organization in your community and
interview the administrator to help identify the needs of the organization. Write a two
page summary of the goals your group determined and any improvements you would
recommend for the organization. Be prepared to present this summary in class.
2. Observe a charge nurse in the hpospital setting for a four hour period of time. Complete
and submit a log, with reflections, about their responsibilities, management style, and
conflict resolution techniques. Be prepared to discuss in small groups in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Ellis, J., & Hartley, C.. Managing and Coordinating Nursing Care . 6th Edition. Lippincott,
2009.
B. Kurzen, C.R. . Contemporary Practical/Vocational Nursing . 7th Edition. Lippincott, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 04/02/2012

