BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 56 - Clinical Nursing I
Prerequisite(s): Admission to Associate Degree Nursing Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 54, NSG 55 and NSG 57
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
272 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This course applies theory from Foundations of Practice and Medical Surgical Nursing I to the
hospitalized client utilizing simulated skills lab and clinical experiences in hospitals to provide
services to adult clients. Emphasis will be placed upon the role of the registered nurse in delivery of
basic bedside care, medication administration, and applying the nursing process to delivery of safe
care. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply the standards of professional practice, including legal, ethical and regulatory framework
to delivery of basic nursing care.
B. Demonstrate basic therapeutic communication.
C. Perform basic health assessment.
D. Apply the steps of the nursing process to delivery of care.
E. Identify the client’s values, customs, and cultural habits that affect delivery of care.
F. Collaborate with the members of the healthcare team.
G. Discuss cost efficient strategies to delivery nursing care.
H. Demonstrate use of technology in the healthcare environment.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Therapeutic Environment: Hygiene
2. Therapeutic Environment: Mobility, Skin integrity
3. Therapeutic Environment: Safety and Mobility
4. Therapeutic Environment: Nutrition, Urinary and Bowel Elimination
5. Medication Administration
6. Health Assessment and Physical Examination
7. Nursing Process and Documentation
8. Medical/Surgical nursing care in the acute hospital
Total Hours

Hours
17.00
17.00
17.00
17.00
17.00
17.00
34.00
136.00
272.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
B. Demonstrations
C. Skills lab practice
D. Clinical client care in hospitals
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration of basic skills learned in the nursing skills lab
B. Clinical Evaluations
C. Clinical Worksheets
D. Direct Observation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Utilize "Fundamentals of Nursing" text "to learn rationale for each step involved in
changing a sterile dressing." Be prepared to discuss these with lab partners.
2. Use the "Fundamentals of Nursing" text to review how to insert an indwelling urinary
catheter. Be prepared to carry out the procedure in the nursing skills lab.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the worksheet "needle lengths and gauges" prior to "the skills lab on syringes."
2. Complete the physical assessment worksheet using "Fundamentals of Nursing" text and
health assessment handbook as references.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View DVD/online skills video on how to put on sterile gloves prior to lab.
2. Complete the self assessment worksheet of percieved competency for the assigned skill,
nasogastric tube insertion, prior to mastery testing.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
B. Pagana & Pagana. Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. 4th Edition. -, 2010.
C. Potter, P.A., and Perry, A.G. . Basic Nursing: Essentials for Practice. 7th Edition. St. Louis;
Mosby, 2008.
D. Olsen, J.L.. Medical Dosage Calculations. 10th Edition. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2011.
E. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner and Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
J.B. Lippincott Co., 2010.
F. Deglin, J.H. & Vallerand, A.H. . Davis’s Drug Guide for Nurses. 12th Edition. Philadelphia,
F.A. Davis, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Mosby's Nursing Video Skills--Basic, Intermediate, and Advanced. Mosby. 3rd edition. 2009

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 02/27/2012

