BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 31 - Clinical Nursing II
Prerequisite(s): NSG 18, NSG 21, NSG 22, NSG 23, NSG 24 and NSG 28
Co-requisite(s): NSG 32, NSG 35, NSG 36 and NSG 37
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
357 hours Lab

7 Unit(s)

This course further develops skills developed during Clinical Nursing I and prepares students to
provide care for hospitalized patients. Focus is on adult Medical-Surgical nursing as related to
concurrent nursing units. Care for the perioperative patient is emphasized. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Performi nursing procedures required to meet the patient’s basic needs in the setting of a
therapeutic environment.
B. Utilize basic communication skills to work effectively with patients and health team members to
provide individualized and culturally appropriate nursing care.
C. Maintain client confidentiality according to Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) and institutional regulations.
D. Administer medications safely.
E. Follow legal standards of clinical nursing practice.
F. Present and maintain a professional demeanor.
G. Accurately assess patient vital signs including pain, and recognize other basic assessments in
the context of specific disease processes.
H. Apply principles of safe body mechanics to increase or maintain a patient's level of mobility and
prevent complications of immobility.
I. Utilize the nursing process to care for adult medical surgical patients in the hospital setting.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Nursing care of the adult patient in the medical surgical hospital setting
2. Care of the adult patient in perioperative setting
3. Care of the adult patient receiving wound or ostomy care
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor supervised care of patients
B. Nursing assessments
C. Patient care plans
D. Post conferences
E. Observational experiences
F. Written clinical preparation packet

Hours
273.00
63.00
21.00
357.00

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Clinical case studies
B. Clinical evaluation
C. Clinical preparation packets
D. Return demonstration of nursing skills used in hospital patient care
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Use the medical surgical text book to review the disease process, medical care, and
nursing care prior to assuming care for an assigned patient.
2. Utilize the fundamentals of nursing text to review correct insertion of a indwelling urinary
catheter. Be prepared to insert an indwelling urinary catheter with instructor assistance
during the clinical rotation.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the clinical preparation packet prior to the clinical day to safely care for
assigned patient.
2. At the conclusion to the perioperative clinical rotation experience, complete a 2 page
paper using APA format responding to a set of instructor generated questions.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Visit an ambulatory/outpatient care facility. Describe the various anesthetic and analgesic
agents used in this setting.
2. Observe and assist at a wound care clinic. Describe various wound and ostomy dressings
used in this setting. Compare and contrast wound management in this setting to the
hospital setting.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Abrams, A. C. . Clinical Drug Therapy Rationales For Nursing Practice . 9th Edition.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, 2009.
B. Deglin, J. H., & Vallerand, A. H. . Davis's Drug Guide . 12th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis,
2009.
C. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
D. Kozier, B., Erb, G., Blais, K., & Wilkinson, J. M. Fundamentals Of Nursing: Concepts, Process,
And Practice . 8th Edition. New Jersey: Peason/Prentice Hall, 2008.
E. Lewis, S. M., Heitkemper, M., & Dirksen, S. R. . Medical-Surgical Nursing . 8th Edition. St.
Louis: C. V. Mosby, 2011.
F. Pagana, K. D., & Pagana, T. J.. Manual Of Diagnostic And Laboratory Tests . 4th Edition. St.
Louis, MO: Mosby, 2010.
G. Thomas, C. L. (Ed.). Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary . 19th Edition. Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis, 2001.

Created/Revised by: Macy Kelly
Date: 04/02/2012

