BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 77 - Complex Medical/Surgical Nursing IV
Prerequisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 69, NSG 71
Co-requisite(s): NSG 74, NSG 78, NSG 79, NSG 81
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course covers the nursing care of adult clients with high risk, complex, and critical health care
problems and adaptation to these problems is addressed. Students will study the nursing process
related to the care of patients with multiple system disorders, unstable medical conditions, and critical
health care disorders. This course is a continuation of topics addressed in NSG 67 and emphasizes
pathophysiology, complex issues in nursing process and professional and advocacy nursing roles.
Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Formulate nursing diagnoses based on North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA) for clients with high risk, complex health care problems in order to assist clients in
maintaining and promoting health adaptation.
B. Describe the pathophysiology, medical diagnosis, and treatment including pharmacology and
nutritional aspects of adult clients with high risk, complex, and critical health care problems.
C. Formulate and prioritize individualized plans of care for clients with high risk, complex, and
critical health care problems based on the nursing diagnosis.
D. Describe advanced nursing techniques used in the care of clients with high risk, complex, and
critical health problems.
E. Identify methods of prevention and early detection used to obtain and maintain health in client at
risk for development of high risk, complex, and critical health care problems.
F. Evaluate the effectiveness of nursing interventions and the need for change in the care plan.
G. Describe nursing strategies and interventions to assist clients and families in adapting to high
risk, complex, critical, and terminal health care problems.
H. Prioritize nursing care based on acuity of client's nursing diagnoses related to adaptation and
health.
I. Describe the professional role of the nurse including legal and ethical parameters and client
advocacy related to care of clients with high risk, complex, and critical health care problems.
J. Develop formal and informal teaching plans for clients staff and families in order to provide
optimum care for clients with high risk, complex, and critical health care problems.
K. Identify community resources available to assist clients and families in dealing with geriatric or
chronic health care problems after discharge from the health care agency.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1.
Hemodynamic Monitoring
2.
Renal System
3.
Hematology/ Immune System

Hours
2.00
6.00
8.00

4.
Endocrine Disorders
5.
Shock
6.
Fluid and Electrolytes
7.
Neurology
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
2.00
8.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Assigned Reading
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers/Reports
B. Examinations/Quizzes
C. Homework Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter 27 (Management of Patients with Dysrhythmias and Conduction Problems)
in your medical-surgical textbook. Be preapred to determine arrhythmias in small group
work in class.
2. Read chapters 60 (Assessment of Neurological Function) and 61 (Management of Patients
with Neurological Dysfunction)in your medical-surgical textbook, and be prepared to
discuss main topics in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete and submit assigned neurological case study, and relate it to a patient you have
cared for.
2. Complete and submit renal case study as assigned, and relate it to patient you have cared
for.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete Blackboard quiz "Cardiac Arrhythmias". Submit answers and post one entry on
discussion board.
2. Complete assigned Kaplan practice tests and on-line remediation. Be prepared to discuss
remediation items in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Weber, J. R.. Nurses's Handbook of Health Assessment. 7th Edition. Lippincott, Williams and
Wilkins, 2009.
B. Urden,Stacy & Lough. Critical care nursing. 6th Edition. Mosby, 2010.
C. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner & Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

