BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 50 - Principles of I.V. Therapy
Prerequisite(s): Graduate Vocational Nurse or Licensed Vocational Nurse
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
29 hours Lecture
9 hours Lab

2 Unit(s)

This course provides the Licensed Vocational Nurse (LVN) with state certification in intravenous (IV)
therapy and blood withdrawal. The theory related to legal responsibilities, infection control, fluid and
electrolytes, composition of parenteral solutions, technique for venipuncture, equipment and
transfusion therapy are presented based on state guidelines. Hands on experience is provided during
lab time with IV and blood withdrawal equipment and simulation arm models. The student will be
required to complete three venipunctures and blood withdrawals on clients in a clinic setting, as per
state requirements. This course provides 36 hours of continuing education for the LVN.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the legal requirements pertaining to starting and/or superimposing intravenous fluids
and withdrawing blood as defined by Title 16.
B. Explain the rationale for initiation of an intravenous infusion, a blood infusion, and a blood
component infusion.
C. Differentiate types of parenteral fluids and correlate each with fluid nd electrolyte imbalances,
identifying clinical manifestations associated with fluid and electrolyte imbalance.
D. Correlate the relevant anatomy and physiology of criteria for selection of venipuncture or skin
puncture sites, identifying appropriate devices and use of each.
E. Explain the safety precautions utilized when administering intravenous therapy, blood, blood
components, and for withdrawing blood.
F. Identify potential complications (local and systemic) of intravenous therapy, blood infusion,
blood component infusion, and blood withdrawal including appropriate nursing observations and
preventive measures.
G. Discuss psychological preparation for a person prior to initiating intravenous therapy and/or
blood withdrawal.
H. Explain appropriate techniques for performing venipuncture (include direct and indirect) and
skin puncture, identifying proper equipment for each.
I. Select appropriate venipuncture and skin puncture equipment and correctly assemble for use.
J. Perform three (3) successful venipunctures and one (1) successful skin puncture on live subjects
utilizing aseptic technique. (Required for certification)
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction/Rationale for I.V. Therapy
2. Legal Aspects
3. Review of Anatomy for I.V. Therapy & Venipuncture

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00

4. I.V. Equipment & Devices
5. Electrolyte & Fluid Balance
6. Acid/Base Balance
7. I.V. Solutions
8. Administration of I.V. Medication
9. Intralipid Therapy
10. Complications of IV Therapy
11. Parenteral Nutrition
12. Procedure for Administration of IV Therapy/Practice
13. Transfusion/Blood Product Administration
14. Venipunctures for Laboratory Analysis
Total Hours

3.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
29.00

Lab
Topics
1. Laboratory Practice - IV Therapy/Blood Withdrawal
Total Hours

Hours
9.00
9.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Written Quizzes
B. Written Final
C. Written Patient Case Study
D. Return Demonstrations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter 1. Define the role of the LVN as it applies to professional practice concepts
for IV therapy.
2. Read chapter 7. Identify and discuss phlebotomy techniques.
B. Writing Assignments
1. List different types of parenteral solutions. Contrast the osmolarity of each (isotonic,
hypotonic, hypertonic).
2. Compare signs and symptoms of imbalances (hyper and hypo)of the following
electrolytes: Na+, K+, Cl-.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Perform three successful venipunctures on live subjects using aseptic technique.
2. Perform one successful skin puncture on live subjects utilizing aseptic technique.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:

Textbooks:
A. Phillips, L.D. . Manual of IV Therapeutics . 5th Edition. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 02/27/2012

