BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 205 - Home Health for the Certified Nurses Aide (CNA)
Prerequisite(s): NSG 200, NSG 201 or a Current CNA License
Recommended Prep: Reading Level II; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: NT
22 hours Lecture
22 hours Lab

1.5 Unit(s)

This course provides the theory and laboratory experiences required for state-certified nursing
assistants to become eligible for home health aide certification. Content includes: orientation to home
health care, personal care of clients including medical and social needs; nutrition, safety and
cleanliness in the home. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the philosophy of home health and the role of the home health aide.
B. Apply appropriate measures for maintaining safety and cleanliness in the home.
C. Apply interventions to meet medical and social needs of home-bound clients, including
therapeutic communication with clients, family, and other health personnel.
D. Perform personal care and basic nursing procedures for clients in the home at the CNA/HHA
level.
E. Apply guidelines for food selection, storage, planning and preparation including basic principles
of nutrition.
F. Document care provided to clients in home care in a professional and complete manner.
G. Describe common long-term diseases/conditions, related nursing care, and rehabilitation
techniques in the home care setting.
H. Discuss factors which influence the quality of life for the disabled and elderly.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Orientation to Home Health and role of HHA
2. Medical and Social Needs of Clients
3. Nutrition in the Home
4. Personal Care Services and Nursing Procedures
5. Cleaning and Care Tasks in the Home
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
6.00
5.00
6.00
3.00
22.00

Lab
Topics
1. Nutrition in the Home
2. Personal Care Services and Nursing Procedures
3. Cleaning and Care Tasks in the Home

Hours
3.00
15.00
2.00

4. Home Health Observation
Total Hours

2.00
22.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Observation in the Home
G. Laboratory Practice
H. Small group activities
I. Case studies
J. Team Projects
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Written Assignments
C. Written Test
D. Return Demonstration
E. Oral Presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in your textbook, "Safety in the Home Care Setting" and be prepared to
engage in a classroom discussion on the safety issues for clients.
2. Read an article on end of life care and how it applies in the home care setting. Be prepared
to discuss this topic in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a one page paper on funding of home care by medicare. Be prepared to discuss in
class.
2. Write a complete description of a client's home setting and its hazards. Be prepared to
discuss in small groups in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe a home care aide/nurse in the home care setting. In class, discuss in small groups
positives and negatives of that care the client received.
2. Research community agencies available to help clients in their home. Be prepared to
discuss these services in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Carter, P.. Lippincott's nursing assistants: A humanistic approach to caregiving workbook. 3rd
Edition. Lippincott, 2012.
B. Carter, P.. Lippincott's nursing assistants: A humanistic approach to caregiving. 3rd Edition.
Lippincott, 2012.
C. Fuzy, J., & Leahy, W.. The home health aide handbook. 1st Edition. Hartman, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Lippincott's video series for Nursing Assistants; Carter, P. 2012

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 04/16/2012

