BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 68 - Clinical Nursing III
Prerequisite(s): Admission to ADN Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 69, NSG 71
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
272 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This course provides students with directed clinical experiences in hospitals, community health
agencies and agencies that provide services to the acutely ill adult, to the elderly or those having
disabilities/chronic conditions. Through the use of the nursing process, the student will provide care,
teaching, support, and rehabilitation to individuals who have acute or chronic illness, disabilities, or
are elderly in the hospital or in the community. Emphasis will be upon the role of the registered nurse
to promote illness prevention, community health, and positive aging and client independence. Pass/No
Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Formulate a nursing diagnosis according to NANDA criteria based on information gathered from
a variety of sources related to the client's biopsychosocial aspects.
B. Utilize nursing knowledge and assessment skills to recognize related cues and define real and
potential nursing diagnoses for adult, geriatric and disabled clients.
C. Utilize nursing knowledge including human sexuality, pharmacology, nutrition, and cultural
diversity in the nursing process to plan and prioritize care for adults and elderly/disabled based
upon the client's nursing diagnosis, developmental level, and ability to adapt to his/her
environment.
D. Provide individualized nursing case based upon the nursing diagnosis, health status,
developmental level, and ability to adapt to the environment according to standards of practice,
policy, and in collaboration with other appropriate health care professionals.
E. Evaluate care based upon outcome criteria and implements appropriate modifications of nursing
care based upon ongoing assessment of the client, family, or group.
F. Demonstrate the ability to communicate verbally, non-verbally, and in writing with clients,
families, groups, agencies, health providers to provide care supportive of maintaining wellness,
promoting adaptation, and/or providing care or services to the elderly and/or disabled.
G. Manage individualized care for a group of clients utilizing available resources appropriately and
supervising care providers according to agency policy and legal requirements.
H. Initiate and participate in the referral and utilization of community agencies and resources to
assist clients, families, and groups.
I. Develop, implement, and evaluate formal and informal teaching of clients, families, groups, and
care providers to provide prevention, support, and promotion of adaptation of elderly/disabled.
J. Provide care within legal requirements and ethical guidelines consistent with professional
standards of registered nursing practice consulting with other health professionals and
advocating for clients when appropriate.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lab
Topics
1. Nursing care of adult and older adult clients in senior services, community
and home care nursing environments
2. Hospital care of adult and geriatric clients with complex chronic illnesses
Total Hours

Hours
116.00
156.00
272.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Patient Care Assignments
B. Observations
C. Clinical Simulation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Clinical Evaluations
B. Clinical Worksheets
C. Directed Journal Writings
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Given a patient with a complex chronic illness condition, research the condition in the
medical surgical text and contrast and compare the actual patient's condition with the
textbook description.
2. Read the chapter in the text book on neurologic trauma. Develop a plan of care to prevent
and manage long term complications.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a two page pager analyzing the role of the team leader based on class discussions,
reading assignments, and interview of a nurse team leader.
2. Using class handouts and readings from the text write a two page paper analyzing the
safety of the home environment of your assigned home care client.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the hospital module on infection control and complete the post test.
2. Complete the nursing care plan for an assigned patient in the hospital prior to the second
day of assigned care.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gahart & Nazareno. Intravenous Medication. 28th Edition. Mosby, 2011.
B. Pagana & Pagana. Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. 4th Edition. Mosby, 2010.
C. Smeltzer & Bare. Brunner and Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing. 12th Edition.
J.B. Lippincott Co., 2010.
D. Eliopoulos, C.. Gerontologic Nursing. 7th Edition. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2009.
E. Carpenito-Moyet, LJ. Nursing Diagnosis: Application to Clinical Practice. 13th Edition.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
F. Hunt, R.. Introduction to Community Based Nursing. 4th Edition. Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, 2008.
G. Jarvis, C.. Pocket Companion for Physical Examination and Health Assessment. 6th Edition.
Elsevier, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

