BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 61 - Pharmacology
Prerequisite(s): Admission to ADN Program
Co-requisite(s): NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 69, NSG 71
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course is a study of the fundamental concepts of pharmacology, with a focus on
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and related nursing implications for the major drug classes.
Nursing process and cultural implications will be discussed for the basic drug classifications. Graded
only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the standards of professional practice, including legal, ethical and regulatory framework
for administration of medications.
B. Describe therapeutic communication.
C. Perform assessments related to medication administration.
D. Apply the steps of the nursing process in delivery of medications.
E. Evaluate the client’s values, customs, and cultural habits that affect medication compliance.
F. Propose patient education strategies related to medication therapy.
G. Explore cost efficient strategies in the delivery of nursing care related to medication therapy.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. General Principles of Pharmacology: Nursing Process and Drug Therapy
2. General Principles of Pharmacology: Pharmacologic Principles
3. Central Nervous System Agents: Analgesics
4. Central Nervous System Agents: Sedative/Hypnotics
5. Central Nervous System Agents: Anticonvulsants
6. Central Nervous System Agents: Antidepressants
7. Central Nervous System Agents: CNS Stimulants
8. Cardiovascular/Renal Agents: Positive Inotropic Agents
9. Cardiovascular/Renal Agents: Antianginal agents
10. Cardiovascular/Renal Agents: Diuretics
11. Cardiovascular/Renal Agents: Antihypertensive agents
12. Antiinfective/Antiinflammatory Agents: Antiobiotics
13. Antiinfective/Antiinflammatory Agents: Antivirals
14. Antiinfective/Antiinflammatory Agents: NSAIDS
15. Antiinfective/Antiinflammatory Agents: Corticosteroids
16. Gastrointestinal Agents: Acid-controllong agents

Hours
2.00
3.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
1.00

16. Gastrointestinal Agents: Acid-controllong agents
17. Gastrointestinal Agents: Antiemetic and antinausea agents
Total Hours

1.00
2.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Written Assignments
C. Class Presentations
D. In Class Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter 1, focusing on the nursing process and drug therapy. Be prepared to discuss
in class.
2. Read chapters 13 and 15, comparing and contrasting the prototype medications for
sedative/hypnotic agents based on mode of action and potential side effects. Be prepared
to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Develop a worksheet based on the nursing process, with emphasis on reviewing how to
write a nursing diagnosis. Present this worksheet in class.
2. Read a case study presentation based on opiod analgesics. Using APA format, answer the
5 critical thinking questions using supportive textbooks as references. Be prepared to
discuss in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In small groups, answer a question based on a clinical scenario presented in class. Share
the group answer with the rest of the class.
2. In small groups, illustrate a concept map identifying a specific side effect associated with
an antiinfective agent and the physical assessment data to monitor for the occurence of
that side effect. Be prepared to discuss in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Liulley, L., Rainforth Collins, S., Harrington, S., and Snyder, J.. Pharmacology and the Nursing
Process. 6th Edition. St. Louis: Mosby, 2010.
B. Deglin, J.H. & Vallerand, A.H. . Davis’s Drug Guide for Nurses. 11th Edition. Philadelphia:
F.A. Davis, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

