BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
NSG 79 - Mental Health/Psychiatric Nursing
Prerequisite(s): NSG 61, NSG 67, NSG 68, NSG 69, NSG 71
Co-requisite(s): NSG 74, NSG 77, NSG 78, NSG 81
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

This course is designed to enable the student to acquire knowledge and skills in the systematic
observation of patients with psychopathologic syndromes and developmental disabilities. Students
will also increase their general knowledge of the dynamics, etiology, and treatment of
psychopathology. Emphasis is placed on further development of the nurse’s therapeutic self, and the
utilization of the nursing process. This course is specifically directed toward the identification of
nursing care goals, approaches, and interventions which are applicable to any patient experiencing
psychological distress. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Compare and contrast a DSM-IV-TR medical diagnosis with a nursing diagnosis.
B. Relate psychiatric symptoms and neurophysiologic mechanisms of actions associated with
common psychotropic medications.
C. Compare and contrast various types of conventional and alternative therapies.
D. Explain the importance of culturally relevant care in psychiatric mental health nursing practice.
E. Compare the different approaches the nurse would consider when performing a mental health
assessment of a child, adolescent, or an older adult.
F. Identify nursing diagnoses and interventions as they relate to clients with psychiatric disorders,
taking into consideration developmental level, nutritional status, cultural diversity and sexuality.
G. Explore qualities that foster a therapeutic nurse-patient relationship and qualities that contribute
to a non-therapeutic nursing interactive process.
H. Examine influences on the future of community psychiatric mental health nursing.
I. Identify the therapeutic factors that operate in all groups, as well as the various roles that
members assume within a group.
J. Develop awareness of the balance between the patient's rights and the rights of society.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Psychiatric/Mental Health Concepts
2. Psychiatric/Mental Health Nursing Interventions
3. Care of Clients with Psychiatric Disorders
4. Psychiatric/Mental Health Nursing Special Populations
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
8.00
12.00
8.00
34.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Student Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers
B. Written Examinations
C. Programmed Instruction
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Chapter 6 in your textbook. Describe the phases of relationship development and
tasks associated with each phase. Be prepared to discuss these concepts in class.
2. Read the article "See What I'm Saying" by Nathaniel Reade and be prepared to discuss in
class the therapeutic communication techniques used by the individual in this article.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Review and answer the questions on the Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) worksheet.
Please bring answered handout to discuss in class.
2. Read the article "See What I'm Saying" by Nathaniel Reade. Please submit your responses
as assigned.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Each group of students will choose a common psychiatric/mental health disorder. Using
concept mapping technique, describe the prevalence, comorbidity, and the theory of the
disorder. Prepare to present the concept map in class.
2. Please view one of the assigned movies and respond to the questions regarding the movie
you viewed. Answer the submitted questions. Be prepared to participate in discussion in
class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Townsend, M.. Essentials of Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing, Concepts of Care in
Evidenced-Based Practice. 5th Edition. F.A. Davis, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Reference books/journals in Butte College Library for additional resource reading.
B. Instructor assigned websites.

Created/Revised by: Susan Craig
Date: 10/22/2012

