BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
OLS 329 - Occupational Certification Workshop
Prerequisite(s): OLS 327, OLS 328
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course provides certification in an area of study selected by the student for the purpose of
preparing to obtain employment in one of the following topic areas: customer service, food service,
greenhouse and nursery operations, hospitality, irrigation, retail sales, small engine repair, and
warehousing. Unlimited repeats. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify essential tasks in a specific occupation.
B. Demonstrate ability to perform occupation specific skills.
C. Work in a chosen occupation independently and successfully.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Tasks and skills will be specific to one of the following occupations: customer service, food
service, greenhouse and nursery operations, hospitality, irrigation, retail sales, small engine
repair, and warehousing.
Lab
Topics
1. Orientation and background of the occupation
2. Identify essential tasks
3. Skills specific to the occupation
4. Vocabulary specific to the occupation
5. Working independently
6. Procedures of the occupation
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Collaborative Group Work
B. Class Activities
C. Demonstrations
D. Hands-on Learning
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration
B. Journal
C. Class participation

Hours
4.00
10.00
10.00
5.00
17.00
5.00
51.00

D. Performance Examinations
E. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and summarize occupation specific material to do a class presentation.
2. Read information about non-profit employment positions and note specific skills needed
to prepare and submit a task analysis to the instructor.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Summarize major details regarding essential safety rules for a specific occupation and
submit to the instructor.
2. Keep a journal of work activities accomplished in a non-profit setting to turn in at the end
of the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Certification host company instructional materials
B. Occupation Specific Materials
C. Online Resources
D. Instructor Designed Materials

Created/Revised by: Julie Nuzum
Date: 04/27/2015

