BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PHIL 95 - Special Studies-PHIL
Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU

1 - 3 Unit(s)

Supervised study in researching an area in the student's academic major. Any student interested in
registering for a Special Studies course should contact a full-time instructor or chair/coordinator in the
appropriate area no later than the last day of the tenth week of instruction. 51–153 hours Independent
Study. Students may enroll in this course up to 3 unit(s) to complete the entire curriculum of the
course.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Develop a set of research notes based on personal observations, readings, discussions and media
presentations. Notes must be orderly, legible and meaningful for future reference, and include
analytical questions.
B. Produce a summary research report with supporting notes that is orderly, legible and meaningful
for future reference; including an index and bibliography.
C. Draw from their notes sufficient data as to be able to write a logically ordered analytical essay of
at least 1,500 words in a proper research-paper form, on a chosen topic that is pertinent to the
special study theme.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1.
a. Identification of the problem/study
b. Conducting the study
c. Work in progress
d. Final analyses and conclusion
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Discussion
B. Problem-Solving Sessions
C. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Research Projects
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Demonstration
E. Essays and research papers

Hours
51.00 - 153.00

51 - 153

VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Identification of a reasearch project which will include extensive reading, writing (1,500
words minimum), and a presentation of completed work to the instructor.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Identification of a reasearch project which will include extensive reading, writing (1,500
words minimum), and a presentation of completed work to the instructor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. The materials will vary depending upon the specialized project of each student.

Created/Revised by: Current Curriculum Chair
Date: 08/26/2013

