BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PHIL 8 - Methods of Argument
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study of argumentative writing, including traditional topics in logic. The course will
emphasize the application of argumentative methods and models to the analysis of contemporary
moral, political, economic, and philosophical issues.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze an argument in terms of traditional logic (definitions, assumptions, premises and
conclusion, deduction and induction, and formal and informal fallacies).
B. Identify the difference between subjective and objective claims; belief and knowledge.
C. Apply appropriate standards to the evaluation of judgments of value.
D. Evaluate assumptions, evidence, testimony, and statistics as they are used in argumentative
writing.
E. Write an essay that demonstrates the use of generally accepted standards of good argumentation
in the identification and use of sources, evidence, and reasons.
F. Articulate viewpoints found in diverse cultural, political, gender, scientific, philosophical, and
religious contexts.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Reading arguments
a. Examining assumptions (stated and unstated)
b. Active reading (summarizing and paraphrasing, thesis identification)
2. Arguing about issues
a. Reason vs. rationalization
b. Definitions, assumptions, premises and conclusion, syllogism,
evidence, examples, authoritative testimony, deduction and induction, sound
and strong arguments, statistics, emotional appeals and other fallacies
c. Genre identification (such as satire, sarcasm, polemical work,
philosophical essay)
3. Writing an argument and the written analysis of arguments
a. Analyzing an argument (claims and their support)
b. Identifying the author's thesis, purpose, methods, persona
c. Construction an argument (planning, drafting, and revising a paper)
4. Using sources

Hours
3.00

6.00

6.00

3.00

4. Using sources
a. Evaluating print and electronic sources
b. Quoting from sources; plagiarism
c. Integrating arguments and sources
d. Documentation
5. Refining argumentative skills and analysis of short debates
6. Analysis of longer and more abstract written works
Total Hours

3.00

15.00
18.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
F. Writing (minimum 6000 word writing requirement)
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Portfolios
D. Papers
E. Homework
F. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Barnet, S., Bedau, Hl, & Hacker, D.. Current Issues and Enduring Questions. 8 Edition. New
York: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2008.
B. Moore, B. N., & Parker, R.. Critical Thinking. 9 Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Contemporary source materials

Created/Revised by: Daniel Barnett
Date: 10/05/2009

