BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PHO 11 - Alternative Photographic Processes
Prerequisite(s): PHO 2
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of non-silver alternative photographic processes
with emphasis on technical skills, aesthetic values, and critique of photographic work. Students will
learn skills related to safe chemistry usage, scanning, Photoshop manipulation of digital negatives,
paper coating and contact printing techniques. Historical and contemporary trends in non-silver
alternative photography will also be discussed.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use the photography darkroom equipment and chemicals in a safe manner according to standard
rules and regulations.
B. Describe the history, contemporary uses, theories and aesthetics of non-silver photographic
technologies.
C. Produce photographic prints using Cyanotype, Van Dyke, and Gum Bichromate processes
D. Mount and frame alternative photographic work using accepted museum quality standards.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Lab Policies and Procedures
2. Introduction and Orientation to Alternative Photography
3. The Digital Negative
4. Paper and Coating Supplies
5. Considerations For Cyanotype, Van Dyke, and Gum Bichromate processes.
6. Contact Printing Frame
7. Presentation Methods
8. Portfolio Development and Design/Critiques
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
5.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
7.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Lab Policies and Procedures
2. Introduction and Orientation to Alternative Photography
3. The Digital Negative
4. Paper and Coating Supplies
5. Considerations For Cyanotype, Van Dyke and Gum Bichromate processes.
Contact Printing Frame

Hours
1.00
4.00
9.00
10.00
10.00

6. Contact Printing Frame
7. Presentation Methods
8. Portfolio Development and Design/Critiques
Total Hours

5.00
4.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Demonstrations
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Oral Presentation
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Lab Projects
F. Written Assignments
G. Mid-term and final examinations
H. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Select an article on alternative processes from the list approved by the instructor. Write a
100-200 word summary. Be prepared to present your findings in class.
2. Read the chapter in the class text on Cyanotype printing and prepare a 100-200 word
outline of the procedure for the process.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In 100-200 words, describe how you could use one or more alternative processes to
promote a product from the list supplied by the instructor. Be prepared to discuss your
response in class.
2. Select an alternative process photographer from the instructor supplied list. Write a
100-200 word paper on the artist including links to online portfolios or exhibits. Be
prepared to present to the class at least 5 images produced by your chosen photographer.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Do an internet search for watercolor and printmaking papers that work best for each
alternative process discussed in class. Write a 100-200 word report on your findings. Be
prepared to discuss your research in class.
2. Photograph subjects for each of the three alternative processes properties discussed in
class. Be prepared to present the images in class and describe your work.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. James, C. The Book of Alternative Photographic Processes . 2nd Edition. Delmar Cegage

Learning, 2008.
B. Cotton, C. The Photograph as Contemporary Art . 2nd Edition. Thames and Hudson, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 12/10/2012

