BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PHO 14 - Introduction to Photographic Portfolios and Books
Prerequisite(s): PHO 4
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the production of professional portfolios, hand bound books and
digital online publications. A broad practical and contextual introduction to book design will be
covered as well as advanced digital imaging techniques. Students will also learn to plan, develop and
implement photographic projects with particular emphasis on conceptual thinking and the
development of individual style.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Develop a hand bound book using the basic principles of design and publishing.
B. Plan, develop, and publish a portfolio of photographic work.
C. Explain the importance of theme, narrative, conceptual overview and aesthetic consistency in
the portfolio development process.
D. Identify and perform the proper color adjustments, scale, and paper quality for a photographic
project.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Color Theory and Principles
2. History of Photography
3. Book design principals
4. Project Proposal
5. Analyzing and Editing Photographs
6. Photoshop CS2 Filter
7. Portfolio Development/Personal Interviews
8. Hand Bound Book Materials
9. Advanced Sharpening Technique
10. Portfolio Development
11. Self promotion/self marketing
12. Final Critique
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
4.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Camera/Computer Basics

Hours
4.00

2. Book Design Principals
3. Development of Personal Style
4. Portfolio Proposal
5. Photoshop CS2 Filter
6. Portfolio Development/Personal Interviews
7. Advanced Sharpening Technique
8. Development of Personal Style
9. Photographic Critique
Total Hours

12.00
5.00
3.00
4.00
11.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Lab Projects
F. Written Assignments
G. Short papers
H. Portfolio Presentation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned text on Layout and Design in the class text. Using the basic concepts of
design, prepare a two page design for a book incorporating the instructor supplied images.
2. Read the instructor handout on the principles of portfolio design. Choose ten of your best
digital images and prepare a presentation design layout for an internet based portfolio
hosting website. Be prepared to defend your design in an oral presentation to the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the class chapter on the role of subject themes in book design. Review one of the
photography books suggested by the instructor. Write a 200-300 word analysis of what
you think are the two major themes. Be prepared to discuss your response in class.
2. Choose one of the professional photography portfolios from the instructor supplied list of
internet websites. Write a 200-300 word analysis of how your chosen site reflects the
basic principles of online portfolio design discussed in the class text. Be prepared to
discuss
your analysis in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Choose two internet websites from an instructor supplied list that host professional
photography portfolios. Create a chart that compares technical requirements, design

templates available, tutorial assistance and total cost. Be prepared to discuss your findings
in class.
2. Choose two internet websites from an instructor supplied list that offer digital
photography book publishing. Create a chart that compares technical requirements, design
templates available, tutorial assistance, quality of construction and total cost. Be prepared
to discuss your findings in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Volk, L. & Currier, D. No Plastic Sleeves: The Complete Portfolio Guide for Photographers and
Designers. 1st Edition. Focal Press, 2010.
B. Zia, S. How to Publish a Book on a Budget. 1st Edition. Lulu.com, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Nancy Meyer
Date: 12/10/2012

