BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PHO 2 - Introduction to Photography
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the processes, principles, and tools of photography. Topics include
the development of technical and aesthetic skills, elements of design and composition, camera
technology (film and digital), materials and equipment, and contemporary trends in photography.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Safely handle and maintain photographic equipment and materials.
B. Apply the elements and principles of design in finished photographs.
C. Create a portfolio of work demonstrating formal, conceptual, and technical development.
D. Produce photographs skillfully utilizing photographic tools, materials, and processes, including
camera controls, image exposure, image processing, printing, and presentation.
E. Examine and describe historical and contemporary trends, language, aesthetics and emerging
media in photography.
F. Analyze and describe the role of photography in contemporary culture and media.
G. Evaluate and critique photographic images utilizing relevant terminology and concepts.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Safe handling, maintenance, and appropriate use of photography equipment
and materials
2. Elements and principles of design as they relate to photography
3. Concept development and project based approaches to photography
4. Photographic tools, materials and processes, including camera controls,
image exposure, image manipulation, processing, and printing
5. Historical and contemporary trends, language, aesthetics and emerging
media as they relate to film and digital photography
6. Group and individual critiques of photographic images utilizing relevant
terminology and concepts
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
6.00
6.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Lab policies and procedures
2. Wet-lab film development and darkroom printmaking, and/or digital
management, editing, software, and printing techniques

Hours
1.00
17.00

3. Assignment covering photographic tools, materials and processes,
compositional techniques and principles, camera controls, and image
exposure
4. Group and individual critiques
Total Hours

17.00

16.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Field Trips
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Homework
C. Lab Projects
D. Written Assignments
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Critiques/Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read handout on the "Brief History of Photography" and select one photographer of
interest to research. Write a short objective essay describing the photographer’s historical
and personal context.
2. Read the chapter on the camera and complete the "Parts of the Camera" worksheet by
correctly labeling the 35mm and digital camera diagram. Use your camera as reference.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read about the philosophical questions concerning the nature of photography in your
class text. In 2-3 pages discuss the difference between a static black and white image on
paper (the photograph) and real life experience.
2. Listen to a student’s critique of your work and in 100-200 words write a response to the
comments they made. Explain what you think about what was said and why.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Shoot three rolls of film of simple abstractions from everyday objects. Photograph a single
plane using maximum depth-of-field. Do not record motion. Be prepared to give an oral
critique of five of your best images based on the criteria in the class handout.
2. Select a digital or analog work to create a digital negative for cyanotype printing. Write a
2-3 page paper answering these questions: Will you use multi-media i.e. handcoloring or
sculptural elements to enhance your cyanotype photograph? What is the expressive
content of your work? How do your choices of image and materials convey meaning?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Barnbaum, B. The Art of Photography: An Approach to Personal Expression. First Edition.

A. Barnbaum, B. The Art of Photography: An Approach to Personal Expression. First Edition.
Rocky Nook Publishers, 2010.
B. London, B. and Stone, J. Short Course in Photography. Pearson Publishing, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 12/10/2012

