BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PHO 6 - Black and White Photography
Prerequisite(s): PHO 2
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the formation, construction, and presentation of gallery-ready black
and white photographs. Students will make professional quality prints while they perfect their own
personal style and expression. Students will use film to learn the Zone System, basic sensitometry,
advanced printing techniques, and archival preservation techniques. Students will also develop
advanced proficiency in the use of digital cameras, scanners and inkjet printers to produce black and
white prints. Students will also study historical and contemporary photographic trends.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Properly expose and develop film by using the Zone System.
B. Use a spot meter for exposure control.
C. Conduct a film speed test/sensor speed test.
D. Use a densitometer to analyze negatives.
E. Use a medium and/or large format camera in conjunction with a spot meter.
F. Load and process 120mm film and/or 4x5 sheet film.
G. Mat prints to meet archival standards using selenium toning.
H. Describe specific artistic goals and how the content of photographs expresses goals.
I. Describe and interpret the work of other photographers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Visual Expression
2. Film, Digital Sensor and Exposure
3. The Print - Advanced Printing Techniques and Archival Processes
4. Medium and Large Format Cameras
5. Non-Traditional Photographic Processes
6. Portfolio Production/Critique
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
10.00
7.00
8.00
3.00
3.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Visual Expression
2. Film, digital sensor and Exposure
3. The Print - Advanced Printing Techniques & Archival Processes
4. Medium and Large Format Cameras

Hours
10.00
10.00
10.00
6.00

5. Non-Traditional Photographic Processes
6. Portfolio Development, Production, and Critique
Total Hours

6.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Problem-Solving Sessions
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Portfolios
B. Projects
C. Demonstration
D. Homework
E. Lab Projects
F. Performance Examinations
G. Practical Evaluations
H. Mid-term and final examinations
I. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the class handout on “Subject Brightness Range.” Use the Zone System to identify
the value range of three prints supplied by the instructor: flat light, normal light and high
contrast light. Be prepared to discuss your choices in class
2. Read the textbook chapter on the Zone System and label the 10 values of the gray scale on
one of your black and white photographs. Be prepared to discuss your choices in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read the class handout “Criticizing Photographs.” Choose two of the photographs
supplied by the instructor. In 100-200 words, identify its type according to Barrett’s
classification and assess how well they reflect his major theories of art criticism. Be
prepared to discuss your analysis in class.
2. Write down at least one positive and one negative comment made during the class critique
of your five selected photographs. Write a 100-200 word response to each detailing why
you agree or disagree with the comments.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read the class text on testing film speed and ISO settings. Then shoot a film speed test at
your favorite ISO and use a densitometer to quantitatively measure the optical density of
your film. Write a 100-200 report of your findings and be prepared to present them in
class.
2. Select a poem from an approved list. Interpret a line from your chosen poem that describes
a quality of light. Then use the Zone System to guide your exposure and development
plans to best express your line of poetry.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. London, B. & Stone, J. Photography. 10th Edition. Pearson Publishing, 2010.
B. Barrett, T. Criticizing Photographs. 5th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 12/10/2012

