BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PHO 7 - Stock Photography
Prerequisite(s): PHO 2
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to stock photography. Students will learn the basics of creating and
editing stock photography using studio lighting equipment, outdoor photography techniques and
digital editing software to produce commercial ready stock photographs. Students will work with
models, props and locations in the production of stock photos. Students will crop, edit, and digitally
enhance photographs for stock photography.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply basic photography skills to compose images for stock photography.
B. Use computer software to edit and enhance a stock photography project.
C. Select a portfolio of images to be submitted to a stock photography company.
D. Create photographs for a portfolio and prepare them for presentation.
E. Upload images to selected stock photography sites.
F. Describe the basic legal rights and responsibilities of stock photographers.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Stock Imagery
2. Review of Digital Photography Principles
3. Principles of Digital Enhancement
4. Studio Lighting
5. Location Lighting
6. Digital Photo Editing
7. Stock Photography Agencies
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Setup and Operation of Digital Camera
2. Location Lighting Theories and Procedures
3. Studio Lighting Theory and Procedures
4. Post Production Editing/Manipulation of Images
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
16.00
16.00
16.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Evaluation of individual portfolios
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Lab Projects
F. Written Assignments
G. Performance Examinations
H. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on basic digital photography and complete the reading assessment quiz.
Be prepared to apply the chapter information during the photography shooting
assignment.
2. Read the chapter on digital editing and write a 100-200 word summary of the chapter
information for a class discussion of digital editing.
B. Writing Assignments
1. View a student project and write 1-2 page analysis of its content and presentation in terms
of accepted principles of photography and editing.
2. Analyze in a 100-200 word essay how the “Rule of Thirds” is used in a photography
production to improve composition and direct viewer interest. Be prepared to present your
findings during a class discussion of effective photo composition.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Plan a photography production including details of camera placement, model poses, and
composition.
2. Use an online job search database such as http://www.photographer-jobs.com/ to identify
opportunities for stock photographers in California and the United States. Write a 100-200
report on your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Sylvan, R. Taking Stock. 1st Edition. Peachpit Press, 2010.
B. Boughn, E. Microstock Money Shots. 1st Edition. Amazon Books, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Nancy Meyer
Date: 12/10/2012

