BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
POS 2 - United States Government
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

An introduction to United States and California government and politics, including their constitutions,
political institutions and processes, and political actors. Examination of political behavior, political
issues, and public policy. POS 2 partially satisfies U.S. History, Constitution and American Ideas
requirement at the CSU. (C-ID POLS 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain the founding and development of the U.S. Constitution.
B. Identify and evaluate institutions and political processes within the United States and California.
C. Discuss and analyze contemporary political issues and operations in the United States and
California.
D. Explain the civil liberties and civil rights of individuals as articulated in the U.S. Constitution
and federal court decisions.
E. Analyze the role of culture, diversity and ideology in shaping public opinion and public policy
in the United States and California.
F. Analyze how to effectively participate in politics at the national, state, county and/or city levels.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The political philosophies of the framers of the U.S. Constitution and critics
of the Constitution.
2. The process of amending and interpreting the U.S. Constitution and
California constitution.
3. The theory and practice of federalism.
4. Contemporary operations of United States political institutions and
processes, including the executive, legislative and judicial branches of
government and nongovernmental institutions.
5. The rights and liberties of individuals as articulated in the U.S. Constitution
and federal court decisions.
6. Contemporary operations of California state and local political institutions
within the framework of federal-state relations.
7. Individual and group political behavior of Americans and Californians within
the frameworks established by the U.S. Constitution and California
constitution, such as elections, interest groups, political parties, and the
media.
8. Factors that shape politics and policymaking including diversity, political

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
5.50

5.50
5.50
5.50

5.50

8. Factors that shape politics and policymaking including diversity, political
culture, political socialization, political ideologies and public opinion.
9. Domestic, economic, and foreign issues and policies.
Total Hours

5.50
5.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Select the article focusing on comparative election process (Federal and State) from your
supplemental edited volume. Read the article and be prepared to discuss it in class. Focus
your discussion on executive, and legislative positions. How do term limits differ (e.g.
federal to state) in terms of different impacts on how elections are organized.
2. Read the article on Veto power. Be able to discuss how the president of the U.S. uses veto
power. Contrast Andrew Jackson’s use of veto power with the way in which president
Clinton used veto. Discuss how president Ronald Reagan used the threat of veto power.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three page essay on comparisons and contrasts between Republican and
Democratic View’s on tax reform. Your essay should include general differences in the
way(s) both Republicans and Democrats interpret “free-market” views on taxation,
revenue building, and banking regulation.
2. Write a short essay on how the economic theories of John Maynard Keynes has
influenced Federal economic policy making over the last 4 years. Focus specifically on
Keynes views on government spending on infrastructure.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. This week two of the candidates running for Congress (opposing one another) will be in
town campaigning; attend both campaign events. Be able to discuss the major similarities
and differences of the two events. Also, note differences in the makeup of the audiences.
2. Attend the student debate on campus dealing with diversity and education. Be prepared to
discuss in class. Know what “Affirmative Action” is; how was this idea is treated by
various parties in the debate. Were there alternative views to affirmative action presented?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Janda, B., Goldman, H. The Challenge of Democracy. 11th Edition. AP Associated Press, 2011.
B. Patterson, T.E.. We The People. 10th Edition. McGraw Hill, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/04/2013

