BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
POS 3 - Comparative Politics
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

Comparative analysis of different kinds of political systems, including their history, political
institutions, processes and policies, the environments in which they occur, and their consequences.
(C-ID POLS 130).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the role of the state.
B. Distinguish among regime types and their central features.
C. Compare political systems, both in theory and with actual country examples.
D. Explain the impact of the regional, economic, historical and cultural factors on political
institutions and behavior.
E. Analyze political systems by using the comparative method.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduce different regime types and their resulting institutions in political
systems
2. Discuss theory regarding the stability of regimes and transitions from one
regime type to another.
3. Include actual country examples of each regime type in terms of institutions,
processes, political culture, historical/cultural context, and role of the people.
4. Discuss the role of the state and popular participation in political and
economic development within countries.
5. Introduce the use of the comparative method by utilizing diverse historical,
regional, cultural, political and economic case studies.
Total Hours

Hours
11.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Research Paper

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Papers
C. Group Participation
D. Class participation
E. There will be writing assignments totaling at least 2500 words
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article comparing/contrasting political decision making among small scale
Democratic societies and large scale democratic systems. Consider such concepts as
hierarchy and egalitarian organization emphases.
2. Read the Chapter from your text book that focuses on comparisons and contrasts between
modern democratic republics and modern socialistic states. Be able to discuss in class the
differences between the Cuban system and Socialistic countries in northern Europe
(e.g.Norway and Sweden.)
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three page description of the current Chinese political organization. How does the
current Chinese State differ from that of fifteen years ago? Focus on the concept of
economic co-option from western influences as a key factor in shaping recent Chinese
politics.
2. Write a five page essay outlining the key characteristics of the Indian governmental
system. Include how international marketing has influenced political organization in India
over the last twenty years.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. This weekend several dignitaries from the government of Japan are visiting. Attend their
public forum and be able to discuss their current policies regarding the use of nuclear
power.
2. View this week’s CSPAN program dealing with a presentation from UN dignitaries on the
subject of Egypt’s formation of a new government. Be able to identify the current type of
government Egypt has as well as summarizing the role that the United States is playing in
the organization of this “new” government.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Almond, G.A. and Bingham Powell, Jr. G., eds. . Comparative Politics Today: A World View.
10th Edition. Longman, 2011.
B. Almond, A.G., Dalton, R.J., Bingham Jr. G. Comparative Politics Today: A Theoretical
Perspective. 6th Edition. Longman, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/04/2013

