BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
POS 92 - Exploring Leadership
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamental elements of leadership. Students will
explore leadership theories and models as well as their own values and beliefs to develop a personal
philosophy of leadership that includes an understanding of self, others and community. Students will
learn how to apply theory into practice as they prepare for leadership roles in college and community
settings.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define the fundamental elements of leadership including theories, historical perspectives and
future trends.
B. Analyze and evaluate personality, gender and cultural influences on leadership and group
dynamics.
C. Articulate the knowledge, attitudes and behaviors that relate to leadership and group roles.
D. Identify the principles of ethical decision making.
E. Apply leadership theories and group dynamics models to course project work and case studies
assigned.
F. Identify components of a philosophy of leadership and construct and articulate a personal
leadership philosophy.
G. Analyze and articulate the connection of personal wellness and organizational renewal as
essential leadership practices.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Definitions of leadership; dynamics of leadership; historical perspectives;
future trends
2. Evolution of leadership theory; contemporary theories and models
3. Purposes, styles and philosophies of leadership; dynamics of leader and
follower relationships
4. Components of the relational leadership model
5. Family and societal influences on personal and leadership development;
personal leadership styles, values and beliefs
6. Diversity issues including cultural, gender and global influences on
leadership and group dynamics
7. Leading with integrity and moral purpose
8. Components of effective communities and community building techniques
9. Human behavior in group dynamics and group development; effective

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

9. Human behavior in group dynamics and group development; effective
group processes and behaviors
10. Complex Organizations; organizational structures, including mission, vision
and values, and organizational culture
11. Leading organizational and community change efforts
12. Civic Engagement
13. Wellness for leaders and organizational renewal
14. Individual and Group Project Preparation and Presentations
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Reading Assignments
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Papers
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Group Project
H. Group Presentations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the Harvard Business School article, "Discovering Your Authentic Leadership," and
write a 1 to 2 page response to the question - What does being authentic mean in your life
and what steps can you take over the next year to develop your authentic leadership?
2. Read the chapter on Relational Leadership Theory in your text and write a 2 to 3 page
evaluation of the theory including - Which of the elements of the Relational Leadership
Model are most developed for you and why? Which involve knowledge, skills or attitudes
that you have not learned or developed yet? How does this model compare to historical
leadership theories outlined in the text?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create a Leadership Action Plan that includes self-analysis and goal-setting to see how
you have changed as a leader throughout the semester, a review of your personal
leadership theory and a personal plan for continued leadership education/training in the
future. Write and turn in a 3 to 5 page written document and give a 3 minute presentation
on your key findings to the class.
2. Write a 3 to 5 page Personal Leadership Philosophy paper.
Construct and articulate your personal leadership philosophy, including: family history;

gender and cultural influences; personal ethics; knowledge, attitudes and behaviors
related to leadership and group roles; and personal wellness.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Work in a group (3 to 5 students) to address a project of need on campus or in the local
community that you are passionate about. The goal of this assignment is to get hands-on
experience with the tasks and leadership responsibilities required to effect change and
apply leadership theories and group dynamics models to a real organizational change
project. Upon completion, your group will give a 5 to 10 min. presentation about your
project results and your group dynamics throughout the project.
2. Choose two leaders to interview in person. Use the questions provided by the instructor in
addition to your own questions related to the themes of: leadership theory and perspective;
education and training; personality, gender and cultural influences; ethics; leading groups;
and wellness and renewal.
After the interviews, write a 3 to 5 page reflection paper to include the most important
insights you learned from your interviews.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. S.R. Komives, N. Lucus, & T.R. McMahon. Exploring Leadership: For College Students Who
Want to Make a Difference. 3rd Edition. Jossey-Bass, 2013.
B. W. Wagner, D. Ostick and Associates. Exploring Leadership Student Workbook. 3rd Edition.
Jossey-Bass, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Current articles on leadership

Created/Revised by: Kelly Munson
Date: 05/04/2015

