BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
POS 16 - Vital Political Problems
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines major political problems in the United States today that challenge us to think
more clearly and deeply about constitutional democracy. Democracy, freedom, and equality are ideals
explored, contrasted, and discussed in this course. The extent to which free markets replace
government or government replaces free markets is surveyed from both conservative and liberal
perspectives.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. recognize that free and fair debate is crucial to a democratic society. The values and aspirations
that we share as a democratic people are evident in reasoned debate and good faith efforts to
secure consensus in addressing vital political problems.
B. examine the tensions between the Federalists and Anti-federalists at the Founding and the
subsequent incorporation of the Bill of Rights in the first Congress.
C. appraise federal-state relations and be able to discuss both the cooperation and conflict of states
and the federal government. The devolution of authority from the federal government to state
and local governments in some policy areas will also be investigated.
D. assemble more advanced knowledge of Congress, elections, political parties, political
participation, media, public opinion, the Presidency, bureaucracy, and judiciary.
E. evaluate political culture, civil liberties, and the civil rights of citizens in our representative
democracy.
F. analyze and evaluate public policies, political philosophies, ideologies, institutions, processes,
and human nature.
G. recognize features of the free market economy, different ideologies regarding the role of
government in regulating the economy, and income inequality among citizens in the United
States.
H. comprehend America’s role in the global economy and its position as leader of the free world.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Constitutional Democracy in 1787 and Today
2. The New Federalism and Political Culture
3. The Free Market Economy and Income Inequality
4. Civil Liberties and Civil Rights
5. Public Opinion, The New Media, and Political Participation
6. Congress, Elections, and Political Parties
7. The Presidency, Bureaucracy, and Judiciary

Hours
8.00
4.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00

8. The United States and the Global Economy
Total Hours

9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Class participation
E. Students who successfully complete this course will comply with a 2500-word writing
requirement. This requirement may be met in a variety of ways, including answering questions
on quizzes, essay exams, or writing term papers.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article from your text that deals with Electoral College. What is your position?
Why was such a system set up in the first place.
2. Read the article that summarizes the Health Care debate. What role did the Heritage
Foundation play in the formation of the Republican’s approach to national healthcare.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a five page essay summarizing the “Gun Law(s)” debate. Don’t take a side;
summarize the prevailing views on both sides of the issue.
2. Write a three page essay focusing on the Justice Roberts decision on President Obama’s
Healthcare program. A section of your paper should focus on why Justice Roberts made
his decision.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a meeting of the Diversity and Hiring Committee. Be prepared to summarize the
meeting’s discussion in our class. Some states have active affirmative action programs
while others do not. What is California’s current position on affirmative action and what
proposals were being advanced by this college with regard to diversity in hiring?
2. Attend the Occupy Chico and the Tea Party protests scheduled this weekend in downtown
Chico. Report your observations to class. What differences between the two groups were
expressed? How do these groups differ in terms of views on federal spending, national
healthcare, and funding for education.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Miroff, Bruce, Seidelman, Raymond, and Swanstrom, Todd. Debating Democracy: A Reader in
American Poltics. 7th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2011.
B. J Martin, Rodolfo D. Torres. Savage State: Welfare, Capitalism and Inequality. Rowmann and
Littlefied, 2000.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 02/25/2013

