BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
POS 18 - International Relations
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

An introduction to international relations theory with an examination of national, international,
transnational, and sub-national actors and their institutions, interactions and processes as they relate to
global issues. (C-ID POLS 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Explain international relations theory.
B. Identify international institutions.
C. Describe the roles of national, international, transnational, and sub-national actors.
D. Analyze and evaluate key topics such as globalization, conflict, cooperation, diplomacy,
international law, human rights, and international political economy.
E. Discuss contemporary issues in international relations.
F. Apply relevant theoretical concepts to events.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. International relations theory
2. International institutions
3. The roles of national, international, transnational, and sub-national actors
4. Analyze and evaluate key topics such as globalization, conflict, cooperation,
diplomacy, international law, human rights, and international political
economy
5. Discuss contemporary issues in international relations
6. Apply relevant theoretical concepts to events
Total Hours

Hours
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50

8.50
8.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION

A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Class participation
E. There will be writing assignments totaling at least 2500 words
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter from your text that deals with “Constructivists” and “Universalist” views
on International diplomacy. Be prepared to take either the role of a constructivist or a
universalist with regard to settling the ongoing border dispute between Guatemala and
Belize.
2. Read the article on “Shuttle Diplomacy.” Be prepared to discuss in class the following:
who established this approach? Has it been effective? What prevented this approach from
being used in the past?
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three page essay on the theoretical foundations of the constructivist model for
international/cross-cultural communication and the formation of diplomatic strategies
based on this model.
2. Write a short essay (3 pages) summarizing the views of George Kennan with regard to
international diplomacy. Detail Kennan’s philosophy for diplomacy toward the old Soviet
Union during the Cold War. How have our strategies regarding communistic goverment
changed sinc the breakup of the Soviet Union?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. View the On-line video of the UN debate over the situation in Syria. Be prepared to talk
about the history of Syria’s government and why this conflict has arisen.
2. Attend a session of the “International Forum” at the local University. This week’s forum
is dedicated to Canada’s national elections. How is Canada’s system of government
different from that of the U.S. What do these difference spell for national elections?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rourke, J. and Boyer, M. World Politics: International Politics on the World Stage. McGraw
Hill, 2010.
B. Rourke, J. Taking Sides: Clashing Views in World Politics. McGraw Hill, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 03/04/2013

