BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
POS 14 - Politics of Third World Nations
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level V; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

The political dynamics of selected Third World nations are examined in this course. Major emphasis
will be on problems of poverty, colonialism, comparative political structures and behavior,
imperialism, and international relations. This course will also focus on tensions in the political culture
between traditional and non-traditional values in contemporary Third World societies.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. recognize how political institutions in selected Third World countries operate. In addition,
students will examine ethnocentrism and the significance of cultural relativism in evaluating the
governments of Third World countries.
B. explain the process of socialization, citizens’ attitudes toward government, political behavior,
political culture, and their interaction with political processes and institutions.
C. differentiate the features of revolutionary movements in Third World countries. Students will
also examine how persons involved in revolutionary movements engage government leaders to
effect changes in society.
D. classify political systems in Third World countries.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Describe the Third World
2. The Shape of the Third World
3. The Crisis of the Third World
4. The Economic Context
5. The Social Context
6. The Cultural Context
7. State-Building
8. Democratization
9. The Armed Forces and Politics
10. The International Dimension
11. The Right to Development
12. Women and Development
13. Environmental Issues
14. Modernization in Asia; The Decline of Africa; The Deindustrialization of
Europe; and The Future of the Pacific Rim
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class participation
D. There will be writing assignments totaling at least 2500 words
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the article passed out in class that deals with how political scientists classify modern
nation states. In your discussion, focus on the limitations of the definitions given in the
article. Propose a better system of categories for defining modern nation types.
2. Read the article “Emerging Brazil.” Be prepared to discuss this article in class. What is the
current nature of the Brazilian political system. Discuss how certain commodities
exported from Brazil are giving Brazil a higher profile in international politics.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a three page essay focusing on semantic problems regarding how overly simplistic
categories for modern nation states influences our views of various countries. Focus
especially on the label “Third World;” why is this term problematic.
2. 2.) Write a short three page essay focusing on problems associated with the “Fourth
World,” (indigenous societies). Why, in discussions of “third world” countries (keeping in
mind problems with the term “Third World”) are indigenous societies often left out?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend the panel discussion (on campus) made up of students from Pakistan. Be able to
discuss their views on U.S. involvement in Pakistani internal affairs (e.g. U.S. forces
killing Osama Bin Laden, or U.S. war drones working across the Afghanistan border into
Pakistani territory).
2. Watch the Documentary (Nova) on politics in the Philippines. How has the political
system changed in the Philippines since Marcos was driven from office.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Calvert, Peter and Calvert, Susan. Politics and Society in the Third World. Longman, 2008.
B. Sen, Amartya. Development of Freedom. Random House, 2000.
C. Borstemann, Thomas. The Cold War and the Color Line: American Race Relations in the
Global Arena. Harvard University Press, 2003.

Created/Revised by: Michael Findlay
Date: 02/25/2013

