BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSC 20 - Introductory Physical Science
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV; Math Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

Introductory Physical Science introduces students to the earth and physical sciences and includes
introductory sections on physics, earth and atmospheric science and space science. This course is
meant to give students a broad but basic understanding of the concepts, terminology, and methods of
study of the physical environment.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use the Scientific Method as a tool for describing and understanding the physical environment.
B. Explain the behavior of objects in motion and describe the forces that cause those objects to
move.
C. Measure the potential and kinetic energy of a system and explain the different methods of
thermal energy transfer.
D. Describe the nature of sound and light waves and explain how different sources of sound and
light affect the character of the waves.
E. Describe and interpret the formation of common rocks and explain how geologic dating
methods are used to determine the ages of rocks.
F. Explain how Plate Tectonics is related to earthquakes, volcanism, and mountain building.
G. Describe the composition of air and specific atmospheric variables and relate this understanding
to weather phenomena.
H. Explain how the seasons are related to the Earth's orbit and geometry relative to the sun.
I. Describe the motions of objects in our solar system and the laws that govern those motions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Scientific Method and Measurement
2. Patterns of Motion and Newton's Laws of Motion
3. Work, Energy and Heat
4. Waves and Sound
5. Light and the Electromagnetic Spectrum
6. Earth Science: Plate Tectonics Theory
7. Minerals
8. Igneous Rocks
9. Sedimentary Rocks
10. Metamorphic Rocks
11. Geologic Time
12. Earthquakes

Hours
4.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.50
1.50
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00

13. The Seasons: Earth/Sun Geometry
14. Structure and Composition of the Atmosphere
15. Weather Fronts and Storm Systems
16. Origin of Earth and the Solar System
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Homework
C. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hewitt, P.G., Suchocki, J., and Hewitt, L.A.. Conceptual Physical Science. 4th Edition. Pearson/
Addison Wesley Publsher, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Scientific calculator that can perform functions using exponential notation and calculate square
roots.

Created/Revised by: Colin Ferguson
Date: 11/02/2009

