BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSC 50 - Introduction to Weather
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV, English Level IV, Math Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to modern meteorology. Topics include air circulation, pressure and
wind, temperature, moisture, fronts, storm systems, cloud types and air stability. The course will also
include an introduction to interpreting weather maps, synoptic weather forecasting, and climate
change. Math will be used at times during this course but emphasis will be on a conceptual
understanding of basic meteorology. It is highly recommended that students also enroll in PSC 51.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use the scientific method to investigate and evaluate weather topics and atmospheric issues.
B. Analyze the basic structure and composition of the atmosphere.
C. Identify local weather and climate including nighttime radiation inversions, wind and rainfall
patterns.
D. Describe the greenhouse effect, natural climate change and global warming.
E. Identify the basic concepts of atmospheric dynamics including wind, stability, fronts and air
circulations.
F. Describe seasonal and daily temperature variations.
G. Identify and explain the major weather variables measured in the atmosphere including
temperature, air pressure, humidity, clouds and wind.
H. Describe the major precipitation growth processes in clouds and basic types of precipitation.
I. Explain and analyze global climate including the Koppen classification system.
J. Analyze atmospheric heat transfer processes and energy balance.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Scientific Method
2. The Earth and the Atmosphere
3. Air Temperature, Energy and Heat
4. Seasonal and Daily Temperature Variations
5. Atmospheric Moisture
6. Condensation, Fog and Clouds
7. Stability and Cloud Development
8. Precipitation Processes
9. Air Pressure, Forces, and Winds
10. Mesoscale and Local Wind Circulations
11. Global Wind Circulations

Hours
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
2.00

12. Air Masses and Fronts
13. Mid-Latitude Cyclones
14. Thunderstorms
15. Hurricanes
16. Weather Charts and Forecasting
17. Climate Change and Global Warming
18. Global Climate
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
1.00
3.00
1.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Homework
C. Essays and research papers
D. The 1500 word requirement will be fulfilled through research papers and essay questions on
exams.
E. Participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about clouds and be able to compare and contrast different cloud types and features
in class.
2. Read the tropical weather topics in the textbook and be prepared to answer questions
about these types of storms on the final exam.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a paper that is a minimum of two full pages in length about a weather experience
that sparked your interest in weather.
2. Write a four to five page essay summarizing the climate types for select cities and regions
around the world. This assignment will help you differentiate the different climate zones
that exist on the earth.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Use an online resource to keep track of the high and low temperature for a city in
California during the next seven days. Be prepared to share your results in class. This
assignment demonstrates that weather is not constant and must be monitored daily.
2. Keep a journal of the clouds you observe in the sky each day during the semester. This
assignment will encourage students to observe the atmosphere. The assignment can also
demonstrate that cloud patterns can point to changes in the weather including approaching
storms.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Aguado, E, Burt, J. Understanding Weather and Climate. 7th Edition. Pearson Education Inc.,

2015.

Created/Revised by: Brian Reinbold
Date: 10/19/2015

