BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 3 - Introduction to Biological Psychology
Prerequisite(s): PSY 1
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces the scientific study of the biological bases of behavior and its fundamental role
in the neurosciences. Physiological, hormonal, and neurochemical mechanisms, and brain-behavior
relationships underlying the psychological phenomena of sensation, perception, regulatory processes,
emotion, learning, memory, and psychological disorders will be addressed. The course also notes
historical scientific contributions and current research principles for studying brain-behavior
relationships and mental processes. Ethical standards for human and animal research are discussed in
the context of both invasive and non-invasive research. (C-ID PSY 150).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and use basic biological, physiological, and psychological terminology of the
neurosciences.
B. Differentiate among specialty areas within Biological Psychology and the related disciplines
within the Neurosciences and the types of research that characterize the biopsychological
approach.
C. Summarize the major issues in human evolution, genetics, and behavioral development that
underlie the “biology of behavior.”
D. Generate and explicate concrete examples of invasive vs. noninvasive research methods and the
general principles of research ethics for the study of animals and human beings, including the
research safeguards and the peer-review process in science.
E. Explain scientific approaches used in methodologies for the study of brain-behavior
relationships.
F. Explain the general anatomy and physiology of the nervous system and its relationship to
behavior.
G. Describe neural conduction and synaptic tranmission.
H. Discuss the role of the neuroendocrine system as it relates to behavior.
I. Exemplify with concrete examples various brain-behavior relationships including ingestive
behavior, motivation, sexual behavior, sleep, learning, memory, stress, drug dependence, and
psychiatric disorders such as affective disorders and schizophrenia.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Biological Psychology as a Course of Study
2. Genes and Behavior and Human Evolution
3. Research Methods and Ethical Considerations of Biological Psychology and
Neuroscience: Invasive vs Non-invasive, Research Ethics Applied to
Animals and Humans
4. The Nervous System: Anatomy, Development and Plasticity,

Hours
3.00
3.00
6.00

6.00

4. The Nervous System: Anatomy, Development and Plasticity,
Communication within the Nervous System
5. The Effects of Psychoactive Drugs
6. Mechanisms of Perception, Conscious Awareness, and Attention
7. Wakefulness and Sleep
8. Motivation
9. Ingestive Behavior
10. Internal Regulation
11. Hormones, Sexual Development and Sexual Behavior
12. Learning and Memory
13. Emotion and Stress
14. Biological Bases of Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia
Total Hours

6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.50
4.50
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Problem-Solving Sessions
I. Reading Assignments
J. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Journal
F. Written Assignments
G. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on the structure of neurons and their impulses. Answer and submit
review questions.
2. Read the chapter on diseases and their effects on behavior.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Explain the concept of neuroplasticity in the context of early child development.
2. Write a 3 page paper summarizing a case study assigned by the instructor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Make a three dimensional model of a brain using the instructions provided in class.
2. Explore a web site on drugs of abuse. Complete the worksheet detailing drug actions.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Kalat, J. Biological psychology. 11 Edition. Wadsworth, 2012.
B. Pinel, J. Biopsychology. 8th Edition. Pearson, 2010.
C. Freeberg, L. Discovering Biological Psychology. 2nd Edition. Wadsworth Publishing, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Steve Hall
Date: 03/26/2012

