BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 11 - Peace Psychology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the social-psychological themes, theories, causes, and practices of violence and
peace in relationship to self, others and the natural world. We will address how one comes to tolerate
and rationalize violence as the means for resolving complex social and environmental problems.
Students will explore the threats to peace from a psychological foundation and examine how
peacemaking and peace building promotes understanding, empathy, and compassion for personal,
social, global, and environmental justice.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and broaden awareness of the many forms of violence that exist from with in one’s
mind, to all levels of social construction.
B. Identify and describe the subtle forms of violence that impact the human psyche and behavior
through policy, media, and use of language, economics, and other social-psychological
constructs.
C. Analyze the consequences of violence psychologically, socially, economically, environmentally
and globally.
D. Identify several alternatives for peacemaking and peace building to improve personal and global
citizenship.
E. Develop and identify a relationship with inner life: destructive vs. constructive monologues.
Demonstrate more effective choices when confronted with conflict through the use of
negotiation.
F. Evaluate peacemaking and peace building skills and ways of becoming active participants in the
global community.
G. Apply peacemaking and peace making skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course
2. Nature of Human Aggression/Emotion
3. Roots of Hate and Prejudice
4. Cognitive/Affective Perspectives World Views
5. Emotional Intelligence
6. Learning Theories on Violence and Peace
7. Forms of Violence: Direct and Structural
8. Family and Community/Socialization and Obedience
9. National and Global Issues on Violence and Peace
10. Environmental Violence

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
4.00

11. Interpersonal Psychological Strategies for Peace Making/Building
12. Cultural Context for Understanding Structural and Direct Violence
13. Conflict Resolution
14. Peace Building Personally, Socially, Globally and Environmentally
15. Reducing Trauma
16. Peace Practices
17. Final/Conclusion
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Research
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Oral Presentation
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Class Discussion
H. Projects and Presentations
I. Group work
J. Service Learning
K. Journal Writings
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Students will read, define, and apply personal/social examples of direct v. structural
violence; peacemaking v. peace building.
2. Students will engage in self-reflection on concepts related to personal history rooted in
family, media and cultural identity.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a reflection paper to demonstrate a comprehension and application on how violence
is built into the system.
2. Analyze course content and synthesize the material utilizing examples observed,
personally, socially, environmentally, and globally.
3. Research topics using academic sources and Course Reader to demonstrate how one might
shift structural violence to peace building.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Engage course content with family, friends, community utilizing non evident
communication and other skills.

2. Apply peace building communication skills with family members, friends, and community
relationships.
3. Library research on a specified topic chosen by the student.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Marshall Rosenberg. Speak Peace in a World of Conflict. 2nd Edition. A Puddle Dancer Press
Book, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Peace, Conflict, and Violence: Peace Psychology for the 21st Century by D. Christie & R.
Wagner, & D. Winter 2001
B. Nonviolence in Theory and Practice by Robert Holmes & Barry Gan 2nd Edition, 2005
C. The Search for a Nonviolent Future by Michael Nagler 2004

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 05/02/2011

