BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 20 - Personal and Social Growth and Wellness
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is designed with an applied focus on how psychology is used in everyday life and is
related to the other social sciences. Emphasis is placed on exploring ideas of the Self in relationship
with others, society and the world. Students are provided with life long skills to enhance their
motivation toward continued self exploration and to maintain a healthy mental/intellectual, physical,
emotional, spiritual, and social life.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze current psychological theories and research on mental, physical and emotional
wellness.
B. Identify strategies for understanding and navigating interpersonal relationships, including
communications skills and conflict resolution
C. Analyze one's unique personality preferences, styles and strengths.
D. Develop self understanding and personal management through guided imagery, relaxation, and
meditation techniques.
E. Develop an awareness of how their life choices impact the environment and society.
F. Assess the existential question of personal life meaning and apply strategies to overcome
obstacles that block satisfaction or success.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Resarch on psychological health, emotional intelligence and happiness
2. Personality assessment/Assess needs; existential questions on life meaning,
choices; establish goals
3. Relationships and communication
4. Stress, health and Relaxation
5. Habits, lifestyles, motivation and health
6. Self talk: psychologcical theories of cognition
7. Transforming aggression and self destructive patterns
8. Working with insight, intuition and internal guidance.
9. Psychology of money, posessions and well being
10. Courage, inspiration and the future
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
8.00
6.00
6.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Audio and Video Tapes
I. Guided Imagery, Relaxation, Meditation
J. Journal Writing and Drawing
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Papers
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read The science of happiness by Professor Tal Ben-Shahar who teaches what is currently
"the most popular course at Harvard. "Take notes on what research shows raises human
well being and how this impacts our physical health.
2. Read and be prepared to discuss Richo's The five things we cannot change and the peace
we find by accepting them.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After reading about The mysteries of self-sabotage, write out your thoughts on the
different styles of sabotage discussed. Have you seen or experienced examples of these
kinds of self sabotage? Also describe one example you can think of where you or
someone you know broke a self sabotage pattern.
2. Read the hand-out (or see PDF file on blackboard) How we connect emotionally then
write out your reflections on: What 3 things do you find most interesting or valuable from
the article? What is an idea from the chapter that you would like to use in your everyday
life?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Explore the health website by Dr. Mehmet Oz at realage.com. Then identify 3-4 healthy
lifestyle changes you would like to make this semester.
2. Read the hand-out, Strengthening relationships with active listening. Try out the active
listening techniques this week and write out what your experience was like in 1-2
paragraphs.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Goleman, Daniel. Social Intelligence The science of human relationsihps. bantam, 2007.
B. Canterucci. Personal Brilliance. Amacon, 2005.
C. Corey & Corey. I never knew I had a choice. Brooks & Cole, 2009.

Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts as deemed appropriate by instructor.
B. Audio tapes/Video tapes.
C. Additional activities as deemed appropriate by instructor.

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 05/02/2011

