BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 41 - Socio-Cultural Context of Psychological Development
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines psychological developmental theories emphasizing social and cultural
influences on motivation, social-emotional and intellectual development. Exploration will emphasize
how children are socialized from within the family, school, peer-groups, religious groups, media and
communities. Psychological dynamics of power and sexual orientation are examined and how these
influence individuals across lower socioeconomic environments and underrepresented groups as well
as American Indian, Asian, Latin, Middle Eastern and Black cultures.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify major concepts and principles of developmental psychology.
B. Recognize issues facing various groups in contemporary societies: ethnic, socio-economic,
sexual orientation, and religious groups.
C. Analyze problems specifically related to child rearing for economically disadvantaged groups.
D. Explain how religious differences breed conflict socially and globally.
E. Describe ethnic differences and similarities among various groups and identify specific issues
that influence and impact socialization.
F. Examine sexual orientation.
G. Evaluate children's needs from a broader, more culturally diverse perspective.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to developmental theories
2. Cultural transmission and socialization process
3. Socialization in the family and parenting influences & practices
4. Ethnic Identity and Cultural Influences
5. Socio-economics and advantages/disadvantages
6. Sexual Orientation and society
7. Social psychological perspectives and religious orientations
8. Mass media and psychology
9. Building diverse communities across the human spectrum
10. Enhanced outcomes of psychological differences.
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
4.00
8.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
H. Independent observation
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Journal
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on the influences of social forces on human development.
2. Read and respond to an article on socio-economic status and psychological well being.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Create a journal and examine your socialization on ethnic identity. What advantages or
disadvantages have you encountered as attributed to your ethnic group?
2. Write a paper assuming you are a member of a different religious, ethnic, or sexual group
than you currently identified with. What did you learn about that group as a result?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview 3 people from a different ethnic, religious, or economic group than your own.
What have you learned about their lives? What were their fears? What were their
obstacles? What were their successes? Compare and Contrast these to your own.
2. Attend an event of an ethnic group other than what you identify with. Additionally, watch
popular films made by an ethnic group other than your own. Write a paragraph on it.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gardiner, H. W. & Kosmitzki, C.. Lives Across Cultures, Cross-Cultural Human Development.
5th Edition. Pearson Education, Inc., 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Related Movies as assigned, book reports and journal articles as assigned.

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 11/21/2011

