BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 1 - Principles of Psychology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides an introduction to the principles of psychology by surveying the basic theories,
concepts and research in the science of human behavior and cognitive processes. Topics include the
science of psychology, the biological bases of behavior, ethics, sensation and perception, learning and
memory, development, cognition, motivation and emotion, sexuality and gender, stress and health,
personality, social psychology, psychological disorders and therapies, and applied psychology. (C-ID
PSY 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate familiarity with the major concepts, theoretical perspectives, research methods,
core empirical findings, and historic trends in psychology.
B. Explain and compare major theoretical perspectives of psychology (e.g., behavioral, biological,
cognitive, evolutionary, humanistic, psychodynamic and socio-cultural).
C. Demonstrate knowledge and understanding representing selected content areas of psychological
theory and research representing each of the following nine general domains: (1) biological
bases of behavior and mental processes, (2) sensation and perception, (3) learning and memory
(4) cognition, consciousness, (5) individual differences, psychometrics, personality, (6) social
processes (including those related to socio-cultural and international dimensions), (7)
developmental psychology, (8) psychological disorders, and (9) motivation and emotion.
D. Describe and demonstrate an understanding of applied areas of psychology (e.g., clinical,
counseling, forensic, community, organizational, school, health).
E. Draw the distinction between scientific and non-scientific methods of understanding and
analysis.
F. Recognize and understand the impact of diversity on psychological research, theory and
application, including (but not limited to): race, ethnicity, culture, gender, socio-economic
status, disability, and sexual orientation.
G. Understand and apply psychological principles to personal, social, and organizational issues.
H. Demonstrate critical thinking skills in acquiring knowledge and evaluating research.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Major concepts of theories, research methods, and significant findings of
psychology
2. Scientific method, research design, the use of statistics, and ethics
3. The biological bases of behavior
4. Perception
5. Cognition

Hours
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

6. Learning
7. Memory
8. Emotion
9. Motivation
10. Development
11. Personality
12. Social psychology
13. Psychological disorders
14. Therapeutic approaches
15. Applied psychology
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Reading Assignments
E. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read chapter 1 on research methods and history and systems of psychology and be
prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read chapter 2 on neurotransmitters and be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Read, review and submit a 3 page critique of a scientific research article in the field of
psychology.
2. Write a 3-page essay on research findings on the neurology and psychology of stress.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Analyze your own behaviors from the four major theoretical perspectives.
2. Interpret one of your dreams utilizing the key concepts from the chapter of consciousness.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Ciccarelli, S. & White, Noland J.. Psychology. 3rd Edition. New Jersey: Pearson Education,
Inc., 2012.
B. Myers, D. Exploring Psychology. 8th Edition. Worth Publishers, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Vahan Hovsepian
Date: 11/21/2011

