BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 16 - Psychology of Women
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

The course surveys the psychological, biological, cultural and social factors influencing the lives of
women and explores theories and implications of gender. The course is designed to promote critical
and creative thinking with an emphasis on social and personal assessment and integration of content.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate various psychological theories related to the socialization and identity of girls and
women.
B. Compare the social, psychological and economic experiences of women across their life span.
C. Apply current psychological research to explain how girls are taught to feel about their bodies
and what expectations they are led to develop about their abilities and accomplishments.
D. Analyze how gender-related expectations are translated into later behavior in the areas of
assertiveness and interpersonal power, leadership styles, communication and the formation of
close relationships.
E. Evaluate biological and social factors that impact women's health and sexuality
F. Evaluate women's experiences in career, work and the larger economy, and how dynamics of
power impact equity and fairness.
G. Analyze experiences of both female victimization and female heroicism, including the impact of
courageous activism on behalf of women's rights and equity.
H. Analyze the psychological research on female-male differences.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course
2. Psychology of Gender: Theories of how gender shapes who we are
3. Research on biological differences between females and males
4. Body image, Society and Self
5. Women's psychical and mental health
6. Female sexuality and the sexual spectrum
7. Women, work and career
8. Family, intimate relatinships and friendships
9. History of women's social and economic status; global status of women and
dynamics of power
10. Gender, violence and agression; victimization and heroicism
11. Cross cultural and archetypal view of the female experience

Hours
2.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
5.00

12. Action Plan for Continued Personal Development
Total Hours

2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Research
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Journal
G. Class participation
H. Group Activities/Service Learning
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Tannen's "You just don't understand: Men and women in conversation" and be
prepared to describe three conversational styles often used by women and three often used
by men.
2. Read Ch 2 of Miller's Towards a new psychology of women and describe behavior
patterns of dominant and subordinate groups.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Contrast conditions of women's lives during the following major historical periods: "Early
societies"; White settlers in America (16-1700's); Industrial revolution (17-1800's and just
after Congress ratified Women's right to vote. (1920).
2. After reading neuroscientist Lise Eliot's analysis of the interplay of biological and social
factors in preschool development, how would you answer the question, "Why does she
pick the Barbie doll and him the Tonka Truck?"
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Ask 3 women and 3 men that you admire these three questions: What female/male roles
do you most appreciate? If you could change one thing about your gender, what would it
be? If you could change one thing about the "opposite" gender, what would it be?
2. Visit a toy store and walk down the aisles of girl and boy toys and record 5+ kinds of toys
that you see for each gender. Are the toy styles different? Do they develop different
skills?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Eliot, Lise. Pink Brain Blue Brain. Houghton Mifflin, 2009.
B. Lips, H.. A New Psychology of Women: Gender Culture and Ethnicity. 3rd Edition. Waveland
Press, 2010.
C. Etaugh & Bridges. Women's Lives: A psychological exploration. Allyn & Bacon, 2009.

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 05/02/2011

