BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 15 - Lifespan Psychology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides an overview, from a psychological perspective, of human development from
conception through death, including biological and environmental influences. Theories and research of
physical, cognitive, personality, and social development are examined, as well as attention to
developmental problems. (C-ID PSY 180).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Contrast and compare developmental theories and approaches (including how different
theoretical perspectives affect or determine the research and applications that arise from them.
B. Analyze elements of a scientific approach to understanding human development in a
biopsychosocial context.
C. Identify biological, psychological, and sociocultural influences on lifespan development.
D. Describe the ways in which psychological principles and research apply to real world problems
and issues across the lifespan.
E. Describe the sequences of physical, social, and cognitive development across the lifespan, using
the constructs and conceptual framework provided by psychological perspectives.
F. Identify and describe the techniques and methods used by developmental psychologists to study
human development.
G. Identify and describe classic and contemporary theories and research in lifespan psychology.
H. Describe the developing person at different periods of the lifespan.
I. Identify possible causes or sources of developmental change and reasons for disturbances in the
developmental process.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction
a. human development - definitions and controversies in the field (traditional
Vs lifespan, continuous Vs discontinuous, nature Vs nurture)
b. the scientific method
c. approaches to studying change over time
2. Developmental Theories
a. Psychodynamic theories
b. Learning theories
c. Contextual theories (e.g., sociocultural)
d. Cognitive theories
e. Humanistic theories
3. Genetics

Hours
9.50

17.50

6.00

3. Genetics
a. Genes, chromosomes and genetic transmission
b. Genetic and chromosomal disorders
4. Prenatal Development and Birth
a. Stages of prenatal development and birth (labor)
b. Effects of the environment on prenatal development
c. Neonatal testing and competencies
5. Physical, cognitive and psychosocial development during infancy, early
childhood, middle childhood, adolescence, early adulthood, middle
adulthood, and late adulthood
6. Death and dying
Total Hours

6.00

12.00

3.00

3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Individual research and projects
G. Films
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Papers
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Examinations (must measure ability to critically evaluate content with at least 20% essay).
G. Written assignments (Each student will be required to write at least 2,500 words for credit in the
course, this work will be evaluated on content and syntax).
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Chapter 1 and take notes on the major stages of embryonic development.
2. Read Chapter 5 and be prepared to discuss Piaget's theory of cognitive development.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Describe how early attachment styles can impact adult relationships.
2. Write about your first experience with a bully or dominant personality. Then describe
major theoretical views of the causes of bullying behavior.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Observe the body language of couples in a mall in 3 age groups: teen, "middle age" and
elderly. Record what you notice.
2. Watch children playing on a playground for 20 minutes and record what you see using
research strategies common to Naturalist Observation.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Santrock. Lifespan Development. McGraw Hill, 2010.

B. Steinberg. Lifespan Development. Wadsworth, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 10/22/2012

