BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 6 - Abnormal Psychology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces the scientific study of psychopathology and atypical behaviors, broadly
defined. Students investigate abnormal behavior from a variety of perspectives including biological,
psychological, and sociocultural approaches. An integrative survey of theory and research in abnormal
behavior, and intervention and prevention strategies for psychological disorders are also introduced.
(C-ID PSY 120).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and use basic biological and psychological terminology to describe psychopathology and
atypical behavior and mental processes.
B. Compare and contrast the various theoretical perspectives on etiology and implications for
treatment of various psychological disorders.
C. Summarize the major disorder classifications and give concrete examples using appropriate
diagnostic terminology (i.e., DSM).
D. Explain specific research methods and the ethical principles for the study and treatment of
psychopathology.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Psychopathology and Mental Disorders: Historical, Cultural, Social,
Scientific, and Ethical Considerations.
2. Issues in classification and diagnosis: DSM-IV-TR (or current edition).
3. Introduction to Clinical Assessment Procedures.
4. Research Methodology in Psychopathology: Descriptive, epidemiological,
experimental and single-subject research designs.
5. Theories and Paradigms in Psychopathology: Biological
paradigm, Psychodynamic paradigm, Humanistic and existential
paradigm, Behavioral/learning paradigm, Cognitive paradigm.
6. Psychological Disorders (characteristics, etiology, and treatment,
including: Anxiety disorders, Somatoform and Dissociative Disorders, Mood
Disorders, Schizophrenia. Substance-related Disorders, Personality
Disorders, Sexual Dysfunctions and Gender Identity Disorders, Disorders of
Childhood and Adolescence, Eating Disorders.
7. Therapies and treatments, including outcomes and issues related to
psychological intervention.
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
8.00

13.00

12.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Audio and video tapes
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Ch. 4 and be prepared to analyze a case study from a biological, behaviorist and
humanist point of view.
2. Read Ch 1 and be prepared to discuss four challenges in defining "abnormal behavior."
B. Writing Assignments
1. Imagine what life might be like from the standpoint of someone diagnosed with
schizophrenia. In 2-3 pages, describe the type of schizophrenia your imaginary person has
and the sensory, emotional and behavioral experiences they might have as a result.
2. Write a 2-3 page essay arguing for or against the use of neuroimaging technology in court
cases to determine mental or emotional stability.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a drug court calendar at a superior court. Describe the mental health issues that
you observe in three of the cases.
2. Attend an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), Narcotics Anonymous or a similar open support
group meeting. What group norms and rules do people follow? What therapeutic
interventions do you see present at the meeting?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Fundamentals of Abnormal Psychology By Ronald J. Comer, Worth Publishers, 2010.
B. Abnormal Psychology, An Integrative Approach by David H. Barlow & Vincent Mark Durand.
Cengage Learning, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Linda E Johnson
Date: 11/21/2011

