BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 24 - Psychology of Sleep, Dreams and Archetypes
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course examines the research, discoveries and theories concerning the sleep cycle, sleep disorders
and their treatment, the content and meaning of dreams and altered states of consciousness and cross
cultural views of dreams, myths and archetypes.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the principles of biological clocks and chronobiology as they relate to sleep, dreaming,
shift work, and jet lag
B. Evaluate and compare theories and research concerning the purpose of sleep and dreams
C. Describe the major causes, diagnostic categories, and treatment strategies of insomnia and other
sleep disorders
D. Analyze and identify the nature of symbolic language, from prehistoric art to contemporary
symbolism
E. Apply various theoretical approaches to dream analysis to explore the relationship between
dream content and daily experiences
F. Analyze archetypal patterns, from early mythology to contemporary story themes, as reflections
of the human journey
G. Describe research and theories about altered states of consciousness such as meditation,
daydreaming and transcendent states
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The nature of the sleep/dream cycle and relationship to health and well
being
2. Cross-cultural theories about the meaning and purpose of sleep and dreams
3. Methods of dream recall and recording
4. Perspectives on dreams, the unconscious, symbolic language and varied
states of consciousness
5. Theories and methods of dream interpretation
6. Experience and value of guided imagery, active imagination and meditation
practices
7. Dream re-entry for self-discovery and problem resolution
8. Sleep disorders and treatment, facilitating healthy sleep patterns
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
6.00
2.00
8.00
12.00
8.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Class Activities
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Lecture, printed handouts, reading assignments, films, audio tapes, and video tapes will be used
to present new material. Small group discussion as well as one-on-one interaction will be used
to facilitate dream interpretation. Journal writing at home is an integral part of this course. The
writing requirements of this course will exceed 1,500 words.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Papers
D. Homework
E. Journal
F. Class participation
G. Examinations
H. Dream Papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Garfield's The Dream Key and be prepared to discuss the five most common dream
themes experienced by people around the world.
2. Read Chapter 3 of The Mind at Night: The new science of how and why we dream and
take notes on the key parts of the brain that are active during REM sleep.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Describe a dream you have had and analyze it from three different theoretical
perspectives.
2. Compare the view of dreams of two different indigenous cultures.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Record your dreams during the semester using the dream log techniques.
2. Take note of 4-5 symbols that you like or are drawn to. Bring the images and/or
descriptions of the images to class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Rock. The Mind at Night: the new science of how and why we dream. 2005 Edition. Basic
Books, 2005.
B. Moss, Robert. The Secret History of Dreaming. New World Library, 2010.
C. Feinstein. Personal Mythology: Using Ritual, Dreams and Mythology to Discover Your Inner
Story . Energy Psychology Press, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Text material is to be determined by the instructor of record. This should include material on
sleep research and sleep disorders as found in Wide Awake at 3:00 A.M. by Coleman or as
found in Some Must Watch While Some Must Sleep by Dement. This should also include
material on dream interpretation such as that as found in The Dream Game by Ann Faraday.

Created/Revised by: Linda E Johnson
Date: 11/21/2011

