BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 34 - Eastern Psychology: Traditions and Practices
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to Eastern Psychology. The theories of Eastern Psychology are
practiced and reinforced through the Yoga Sutras. This foundation highlights self analysis through
hatha yoga postures (asana), breathing techniques (pranayama), mental concentration (dhyana), sense
withdrawal (pratyahara), and meditation (dharana). This course is experiential and is designed for
self-enhancement, relaxation, stress management, and increased mindfulness.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the fundamental principles of Eastern Psychology.
B. Explain the study of Eastern psychology from a yogic perspective using the Yoga Sutras.
C. Describe the merger of Eastern Psychology and contemporary Western Psychology.
D. Discuss, compare, and contrast Eastern cultures with Western cultures.
E. Employ yogic practices to strengthen mental focus of one's mind and strengthen the mind and
body through yogic practices (hatha asana/postures, dharana/concentration, dhyana/meditation,
pranayama/breathing).
F. Analyze to evaluate the basis for one’s life philosophy and psychological constructs with the
possibility for change.
G. Describe methods of achieving increased emotional well-being by relieving tension in the body
and mind.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Eastern Psychology: Paths of Yoga; Yogic Terminology;
Tree of Yoga; Integration with Western Psychology
2. Introduction to the Yoga Sutras; Exploring the Mind from Eastern
Psychological Perspectives.
3. Introduce Yoga Health & Healing Practices through Ayurveda
4. Introduction to Pranayama & Relaxation & Basic Meditation Practices
5. Introduction to Asana (Postures); Study Alignment, Structure, Foundation,
Flow.
6. Introduction to the Chakra Psychological System of the Body, Mind, Spirit.
7. Introduction to socio-cultural life of Eastern Traditions.
8. Course Completion: Eastern Celebration, Food, Music, Self-Reflection,
Meditation.
9. Formulation of Action Plans for Continued Practice
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
12.00
2.00
2.00
10.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1.
Pranayama
2.
Relaxation technique
3.
Meditation practices
4.
Standing Asanas
5.
Seated Asanas
6.
Reclined Asanas
7.
Inversion Asanas
8.
Restorative Asanas
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Demonstrations and Practices
H. Presentations
I. Video
J. Exams or Research Papers
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Class Discussion
D. Research Papers, Journal Writing, Personal Contracts
E. Yoga Practices (postures, breath work, meditation) within the
classroom and outside of the classroom.
F. Participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read Yoga Sutra's and consider the potential for personal transformation.
2. Read how to integrate asana, meditation, yamas/niyamas to personal and interpersonal
relations.
3. Read how to integrate asana, meditation, yamas/niyamas to personal and interpersonal
relations.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research Eastern traditions and practices to increase global understanding of another's
way of life and world views.
2. Journal/Writing on how the yoga sutra's apply to your life.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Library research on Eastern perspectives of psychology.

2. Breathing exercises, meditation, and yoga asana, practice to perfect theses skills used for
stilling the mind and increasing inner peace.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Satchidananda, Sri Swami. The Yoga Sutras by Patanjali. 9th Edition. Integral Yoga
Publications , 2003.
B. Gerson, Scott MD. The Ayurvedic Guide to Diet & Weight Loss: The Sattva Program. Lotus
Press, 2002.
C. Reverend Jaqanath Carrera. Inside the Yoga Sutras. Integral Yoga Publications, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 03/05/2012

