BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 36 - Psychology of Meditation and Mindfulness
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the psychological principles of mindfulness through meditation.
Students will explore the psychology of meditation, including major theories and forms of meditation
from ancient Eastern traditions and practices to contemporary Western research on the benefits of
meditation. Emphasis will be on ego-fixation and identification with the root causes of human
suffering. Internal and external stresses will be examined.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe various psychological theories and forms of meditation.
B. Identify and discuss the psychology of self-awareness, motivation, and self-discipline.
C. Analyze and discuss the promotion of ethical living by enhancing personal integrity in daily life.
D. Identify the psychological roots of stress and suffering and the use of meditation to ease stress
and suffering.
E. Explore various meditative practices as a route to greater self awareness, enhanced relations with
others, and appreciation of the natural world.
F. Discuss the influence that Eastern Traditions have on the Western science of meditation.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Eastern and Western psychology of mindfulness and
meditation?
2. Introduce relaxation and mindful breathing using pranayama (breath control)
as a foundation for managing internal stresses.
3. How to manage interior experiences through breathing exercises to alleviate
psychological suffering by examining mental content, beliefs and
perceptions.
4. Mindfulness of the body‘s needs: rest, activity, and diet.
5. Mindfulness of Feelings and the Mind, observing the connection between
cognition and emotional states.
6. Self reflection, observation, and self study on mental states, attitudes, and
personal responsibility for the condition of one's existence in various
contexts: personal, interpersonal, global
7. Practice meditation techniques and explore the effects from a scientific
perspective as related to the quality of life.
8. Apply mindful nutritional plans and practice maintenance of health and
healing techniques from the yogic tradition known as ayurveda.

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00

3.00
6.00
10.00

4.00
2.00

Total Hours

34.00
Lab

Topics
1.
Relaxation
2.
Pranayma
3.
Watching the breath
4.
Mental observation
5.
Use of mantra
6.
Walking meditation
7.
Concentration practices
8.
Mindfulness practices
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Collaborative Group Work
F. Class Activities
G. Field Trips
H. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
I. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Journal
E. Group Participation
F. Essays and research papers
G. Short reflection papers on specific readings
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about 2 meditative practices and be prepared to discuss what you learned in class.
2. Read about the history of meditation across all spiritual and religious foundations and be
prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a paper on the effects of meditation on one's mind-body, and the interpersonal and
social relations.
2. Journal your insights and progress in reducing psychological, physiological, and
emotional suffering/stress through meditation.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct library research on psychological and social impacts resulting from consistent
meditation practices. Include cross-cultural studies.

2. Practice meditation at a consist time and place.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Thich Nhat Hanh. The Blooming of a Lotus: Guided Meditation of Achieving the Miracle of.
1st Edition. Beacon Press Books, 2009.
B. Boyce, Barry. The Mindfulness Revolution. 1st Edition. Shambala, 2011.
C. Deborah Adele. The Yamas & Niyamas: Exploring Yoga's Ethical Practice. On-Word Bound,
2009.
D. Sharon Salzberg. Real Happiness: The Power of Meditation. Workman Publishing, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Yoga Mat Other props to support your practice

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 04/30/2012

