BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
PSY 10 - Peace and Global Studies Capstone
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
17 hours Lecture

1 Unit(s)

This capstone course should be taken in the last semester when completing requirements for either
Certificate of Achievement or Certificate in Peace and Global Studies. This course offers a venue for
an interdisciplinary discussion on global issues and personal responsibility. Students will have the
opportunity to synthesize ideas from each of the disciplines defined by the Peace and Global
Certificates and how these courses interconnect. From this perspective one may become a more
effective global citizen and assist in the advancement of personal, social, global and environmental
recovery and transformation.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze the main points of view according to each respective course taken as outlined in the
certificate of Peace and Global Studies.
B. Synthesize the interrelated perspectives into a cohesive analysis of global issues.
C. Synthesize the knowledge taken from each of the courses into a meaningful whole.
D. Discuss and identify the relevance of global issues with the idea of peace building solutions.
E. Formulate a personalized practice in peace making and peace building for improved
relationships personally, socially, environmentally, and globally.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. An orientation of the goals of Peace and Global Studies.
2. Identify of the essence of each course & specific topics.
3. Empirical data.
4. Social and multicultural influences.
5. Global impacts.
6. Personal responsibility.
7. Implementation of concepts studied into all human systems.
8. Developing personalized peace practices for daily living.
9. Final Conclusion on Integrated Perspectives.
Total Hours

Hours
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
17.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Video
G. Presentations
H. Synthesis Paper
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Participation
B. Active discussion
C. Small writing exercises (journal)
D. Demonstrations and Practices
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Students will read and analyze consumptive practices (food and resources) and relating to
individual practices.
2. Students will read on how to increase community participation as an agent of compassion
and peace building/making.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze course content from each discipline and synthesize the material into a meaningful
whole addressing the question of how these selected courses are interrelated.
2. Write a 3-page essay on the interconnection of courses studied and experiences students
have had as a result of the courses, as related to Peace and Global Studies. How might one
increase peace with self, other, and the natural world.
3. Explain concepts, data, research, that conjoins content from across the curriculum. The
goal is for students to view each discipline not as separate entities but as a lens to
understanding of the complexity of human and environmental systems.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Engage in peace practices where- and whenever possible, and to share within the class
setting their successes, as well as areas that need improvement.
2. Involve themsleves actively in the community (college or larger setting) by doing a
project that engenders the highest levels of human functioning: empathy, compassion,
helpfulness, and kindness toward all living systems.
3. Research topics and making observations of the world, addressing how course content
applies to life, human experiences, and environmental regeneration.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Thich Nhat Hanh. The World We Have. Bantam Books, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Christine Wood
Date: 05/02/2011

