BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
READ 126 - College Study Skills
Prerequisite(s): READ 223 or Reading Level II
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a study skills class in which students will learn and practice necessary strategies for
success in all academic courses. These strategies include note-taking, study and test-taking, principles
of time management, utilizing campus and online resources, using textbooks effectively, and applying
learning styles theory. The course will also introduce students to computer applications that will assist
students with college study skills.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply a range of strategies and methods to improve her/his ability to successfully complete
college coursework including note-taking, effective use of textbooks, organizational and study
techniques, test-taking, and principles of time management.
B. Utilize available campus and online resources and services including computer applications that
will assist students in acquiring college study skills.
C. Apply strategies to increase self knowledge such as learning styles, academic expectations and
effective social strategies that lead to college success.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Study Skills and Effective Communication in College
2. Time, Stress, and Financial Management
3. Learning Styles and Preferences
4. Academic Expectations and Goal Setting
5. College Resources
6. Note-taking
7. Using Textbooks Effectively
8. Textbook and Memory Aids
9. Textbook Underlining and Marking
10. Studying for Content Courses
11. Preparing for Exams
12. Outlining and Mapping
13. Personal Awareness and Wellbeing
14. Taking Exams
15. Reading and Researching on the Internet
16. Final Project

Hours
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
5.00
5.00

Total Hours

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Group Participation
D. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read pages 169-192, "Wise Choices in College: Organizing Study Materials." As you
read, take notes about suggested organizational strategies in the margins of your textbook
or on a separate piece of paper. Think about which of the suggested strategies might work
most effectively for you. Come to class prepared to discuss your ideas.
2. Read "Case Study in Critical Thinking: The Procrastinators" on page 112. As you read,
think about which character has the most difficult time management problem, and make
notes in the margins or on a separate piece of paper. Come to class prepared to suggest
time management advice you might share with the people in this story.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Online Discussion: On Course Self-Assessment.
Please write a detailed response to these questions:
1. In which area or areas were you the strongest?
2. In which areas would you like to develop further?
3. Were you surprised by the results of this self-assessment? Explain.
4. Do you have any questions about the self-assessment?
After you post your response, please respond to the postings of at least two other students.
2. Journal Entry: In this activity you will apply the Wise Choice Process to improve a
difficult situation in your life. Thoughtfully answer these six questions:
1) What is my present situation?
2) How would I like my situation to be?
3) What are my possible choices?
4) What's the likely outcome of each possible choice?
5) Which choices will I commit to doing?
6) When and how will I evaluate my plan?
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Student Interview: Interview a college student who has taken
classes for at least one semester.
Ask him/her “What is one thing you know today that you wish you had known when you
first
got to college?” “Why was this information important?” “What did it take for you to learn

it?” After you interview the student, write down what he or she said and reflect on it.
2. Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access the On Course self-assessment online. Read each
of the 64 statements and score each one according to how true or false you believe it is
about you. Assign each statement a number form 0 (totally false) to 10 (totally true).
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. McWhorter, Kathleen . College Reading and Study Skills. 11th Edition. Pearson Longman,
2009.
B. Downing, S. On Course: Strategies for Creating Success in College and in Life. StudySkills Plus
Edition. Wadsworth Cengage, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Supplementary "handouts" and internet resources

Created/Revised by: Teresa Ward
Date: 03/25/2013

