BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
READ 127 - Reading for College Success
Prerequisite(s): READ 225 or Reading Level III
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course will prepare students for college reading. Students will develop critical reading and critical
thinking skills for success in this and other courses. Students will become more efficient and flexible
readers as they choose appropriate strategies for a wide variety of challenging fiction and non-fiction
reading materials. Skills and strategies will be developed in the context of course readings.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. identify his/her purpose(s) for reading and choose appropriate strategies.
B. demonstrate a variety of active reading strategies, such as annotating, monitoring
comprehension, making inferences, mapping, questioning, and researching.
C. engage in a conversation with the text and respond with his or her own ideas and opinions.
D. identify the author’s argument and distinguish between the main idea and supporting details and
between fact and opinion.
E. evaluate the integrity and credibility of the author’s argument, claim, evidence, and sources.
F. understand and analyze author’s use of tone, figurative language and word choice.
G. employ strategies to understand unfamiliar words using context clues and word knowledge.
H. employ appropriate strategies to understand online material, textbooks, and current news media.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Identifying purpose for reading
2. Active reading strategies
3. Annotation
4. Reading rate and flexibility
5. Making inferences
6. Metacognitive strategies
7. Responding to readings
8. Tone and word choice
9. Identifying and understanding figurative language
10. Using context clues and developing word knowledge
11. Identifying author's purpose
12. Identifying main idea, unstated main idea and support
13. Fact vs. opinion
14. Identifying author's argument
15. Evaluating elements of argument

Hours
1.00
3.00
3.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
6.00
2.00
3.00
6.00

16. Evaluating news media
17. Developing textbook strategies
18. Reading and evaluating online materials
Total Hours

3.00
4.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Individual projects
H. A minimum of 400 pages will be read, including one full-length text.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. As you read the assigned reading, create a "say, mean, matter" chart to track important
ideas, what they mean and why they matter.
2. Read and annotate pages 35-70. Focus on main idea annotations. Be prepared to discuss
the author's argument and analyze the evidence she uses to support her thesis.
B. Writing Assignments
1. For the assigned reading, do a reading log in which you analyze your purpose for reading,
make a plan for reading, and then analyze the strategies you chose to use and how
effective they were.
2. After reading pages 125-55, write a reading log in which you compare Juana's choice to
her mother's choice. Discuss each character's reasons and give your opinion on which (if
either) character had better reasons for doing what she did.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read one of the articles in the "recent news" folder on Blackboard. Analyze the article for
bias and be prepared to share your ideas with classmates who read the same article.
2. Before reading a textbook assignment for another class, preview the chapter, looking at
titles and headings, study aids, text boxes and other text features (maps, graphs, diagrams,
photographs). As you preview the reading, write what you think you'll learn in the chapter
and questions you have about the content.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Spears, Deanne. Improving Reading Skills. 7th Edition. McGraw Hill, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. A minimum of one full length text

B. Dictionary
C. Class handouts

Created/Revised by: Lisa Kekaha
Date: 12/01/2014

