BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
READ 225 - Reading II
Prerequisite(s): READ 223 or Reading Level II
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course will improve the student's reading ability. Emphasis is on developing background
knowledge, vocabulary enrichment, comprehension development, critical thinking skills, and study
skills. The course includes fiction, non-fiction, and content area readings. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply appropriate vocabulary strategies (contextual clues, dictionary, roots/affixes, recognizing
idioms, slang, and other informal language) to unfamiliar words and phrases to construct
accurate meaning.
B. Locate answers to literal questions using text and graphic aids.
C. Apply comprehension strategies to increase fluency when reading a variety of materials.
D. Apply critical thinking skills to answer complex questions.
E. Distinguish between fact and opinion.
F. Demonstrate the ability to recognize the organization of text by creating time-lines, concept
maps, outlines, etc.
G. Annotate text to demonstrate comprehension and metacognitive processes.
H. Respond in sentences or paragraphs to questions.
I. Summarize a short passage.
J. Identify the basic elements (plot, setting, character, theme) of a narrative reading.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Course
2. Vocabulary Strategies
3. Comprehension Strategies
4. Critical Thinking, Deduction and Inferencing
5. Distinguishing between Fact and Opinion
6. Understanding the Organization of Text
7. Annotating Text
8. Responding to What You Read
9. Summarizing
10. Understanding Fiction
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
6.00
15.00
13.00
1.00
5.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Group and paired activities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Group Participation
D. Quizzes and exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read "Nonverbal Communication" on pages 525-527 in Ten Steps to Improving College
Reading Skills.
2. Read the novel Whirligig. As you read, keep track of where Brent is going by tracing his
route on the United States map. In addition, use this map to keep track of important
details/information, including what Brent is experiencing along the way, what the
whirligigs look like and where they are being placed, who he is meeting, and anything
else that is important.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After reading "Nonverbal Communication," answer Question #1 on page 613 of Ten Steps
to Improving College Reading Skills.
Write a paragraph that describes a time when you were made uncomfortable by another
person's nonverbal communication. Tell where the incident occurred, who else was there,
and what the relationship was between you and the person whose communication
disturbed you. Then describe specifically what the other person did that made you
uncomfortable and how you responded. You may also want to refer to the article and
describe what kind of personal space was violated by this person's behavior.
2. Write an essay explaining how Brent changed throughout the novel Whirligig. Be sure to
include a clear, complex, compelling, and contestable claim, and back up that claim with
solid support from the novel. If you would like, you can also include direct quotes from
the book.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. After reading "Nonverbal Communication," answer Basic and Advanced Skill Questions
1-20 on pages 527-531 in Ten Steps to Improving College Reading Skills.
2. Pick one of the characters (Stephanie, Flaco, Anothy, Jenny) from the even chapters in
Whirligig. Using the timeline, take notes on how the characters changed from the
beginning of the chapter to the end.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Carol Bader & Harley Anton. Keys to College Reading. Townsend Press, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Intermediate or collegiate dictionary
B. Approved novel
C. Supplemental material of instructor's choice

Created/Revised by: Teresa Ward
Date: 04/18/2011

