BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
READ 223 - Reading I
Prerequisite(s): Reading Level I
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course strengthens and increases the student's reading ability. Emphasis will be placed on reading
for meaning, developing background knowledge, and enhancing vocabulary. Study skills and critical
thinking strategies will also be introduced. Pass/No Pass Only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Use a variety of strategies to understand new vocabulary and refine meanings of existing
vocabulary.
B. Use a dictionary to correctly pronounce new vocabulary.
C. Locate answers to literal questions based on level-appropriate text and graphics.
D. Demonstrate understanding of organization (main idea, supporting detail, transition/signal clues)
to improve comprehension of level-appropriate text.
E. Access and evaluate level-appropriate information.
F. Integrate reading with other language domains (listening, speaking, and writing)
G. Demonstrate an understanding of basic study skills.
H. Monitor his/her own learning processes.
I. Read proficiently to bring students closer to their practical, vocational, or academic goals.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Course
2. Using Context Clues
3. Using Your Dictionary
4. Pronouncing New Words
5. Understanding Roots and Affixes
6. Finding Facts in Text
7. Finding Facts in Graphics
8. Finding the Main Idea
9. Locating Supporting Detail
10. Transition/Signal Clues
11. Accessing Information
12. Evaluating Information
13. Integrating Reading with Listening, Speaking, and Writing
14. An Introduction to Study Skills
15. Monitoring Your Own Learning
Total Hours

Hours
1.00
4.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Group Participation
D. Class participation
E. Written Assignments
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read "Knowledge is Power" by Anna-Maria Petricic on pages 421-426 in Groundwork
for College Reading.
2. Read the Upfront article “Marriage – or Else.” As you read, annotate the article.
Remember that in your annotations, you can note important ideas, startling facts, your
own reactions, questions, predictions, new words, etc.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Using the article “Marriage – or Else,” your annotations, and your summary, write a two
paragraph response to the article. This is not a summary. This is your reaction. Your
response might include your opinion of the writing, questions you have about the facts,
connections you’ve made between this article and other texts or to your own life, and your
reaction to the message or view of the author.
2. After reading "Dawn's Story" in Groundwork for College Reading.
If you want your education to lead to a specific career, write a paragraph about that career
and why you've chosen it. Provide specific examples of the work you'd like to do and why.
If you are not sure about the career you want, write about one or two that you are
considering.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. In the article “Marriage – or Else,” underline the main idea in each paragraph. If the main
idea is implied, write it in your own words in the margin. Using the main ideas, write a
summary of the article.
2. After reading "Dawn's Story" in Groundwork for College Reading, answer Reading
Comprehension Questions 1-10 on pages 428-430.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Broderick, B. Groundwork for College Reading. 4th Edition. Townsend, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Intermediate Dictionary
B. Handouts
C. Trade Books and/or Magazines

Created/Revised by: Teresa Ward
Date: 04/18/2011

