BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RLS 55 - Property Management
Prerequisite(s): RLS 20 (or concurrent enrollment)
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides students with a basic understanding of property management principles and
practices. The content focuses on issues relating to management, agency, contracts, and practical
issues relating to property rental. Legal issues and government regulations regarding such issues as
evictions, discrimination, landlord and tenant rights and rent control are explored. This course can
fulfill an elective course requirement of the California Department of Real Estate (DRE) for those
taking the Real Estate Salesperson and Broker Exams.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Critically evaluate the law of contracts as it apples to real estate leasing transactions.
B. Define the concept of agency as it applies to real estate property managers.
C. Explain the proper use of land, land descriptions and leasing arrangements.
D. Describe the concepts of acquisition, conveyance, escrow, ownership forms, security devices,
liens, recording, homesteads and title insurance.
E. Identify and define the basic techniques of property management.
F. Prepare a rental analysis and schedule, simple property management plan and standard lease
and/or rental agreement.
G. Identify the challenges and considerations associated with the management of government
housing projects.
H. Balance a trust account record for client rental funds.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Professional Property Management
2. Property Management Economics and Planning
3. Ownership Relations
4. Marketing
5. Leases
6. Lease Negotiations
7. Tenant Relations
8. Maintenance and Construction
9. Managing the Office and Reports
10. Federal and State Laws on Property Management
11. Residential Property
12. Specialized Housing

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
2.00

13. Office Property
14. Retail Property
15. Industrial Property
16. Risk and Environmental Issues
17. Life Safety Issues
18. Property Management Report
Total Hours

2.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Demonstrations
F. Case analysis
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material pertaining to the completion of residential rental forms (such as
rental agreements, 3-day notices and changes in terms of tenancy). Be prepared to
complete examples of these forms in class.
2. Read the text material about commercial properties. Prepare for an in-class discussion of
the management of different types of commercial properties: office, retail and industrial.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze a prospective tenant's credit report and write a 1-2 page assessment as to his/her
suitability as a tenant.
2. Assess rents in the local area and determine the appropriate rent to assess on a specific
property. Write a 2-3 page report presenting your findings/rationale.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct an analysis of an income property and prepare a 4 page property management
plan, including:
• Your operating budget for this property
• A projected income statement reflecting rent received and operating expenses
• A twelve month cash flow statement.
2. Develop a 3-4 page rental property listing for a commercial or residential property.
Include a description of the property, advertised rent and other relevant information.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Huber, W., Lyons A. and Pipar, JD, A. . Property Management. 5th Edition. South-Western
Educational Publishing, 2010.
B. DeCarlo, J.W.. Property Management in California. 11th Edition. JD Publishing, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

