BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RLS 50 - Escrow Procedures
Prerequisite(s): RLS 20 (or concurrent enrollment)
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides students with a basic understanding of escrow, the role of taking an escrow and
how to prepare and process the escrow documents. The course also covers the Secure and Fair
Enforcement (SAFE) Act, signed into law as part of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act
(HERA) of 2008, including its impact in the preparation of the Housing and Urban Development
HUD-1 real estate settlement statement. This course can fulfill an elective course requirement of the
California Department of Real Estate (DRE) for those taking the Real Estate Salesperson and Broker
Exams.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe what an escrow is, its components and the steps in the escrow process.
B. Identify the legal documentation required in an escrow.
C. Explain differences between escrow practices and procedures in Northern and Southern
California.
D. Analyze and solve calculation problems (such as proration, debit and credit to buyer and seller,
and balance to close escrow) with respect to residential and income property sales.
E. Prepare and explain a standard set of sale escrow instructions.
F. Prepare escrow industry forms, including original escrow instructions, estimated
closing/settlement statements (for both the buyer and the seller), escrow amendments,
disbursement of funds and demand statements.
G. Identify various employment opportunities in title insurance and escrow work.
H. Evaluate efforts being made by the American Land Title Association (ALTA), as well as by
individual escrow companies, to comply with requirements of the SAFE Act; the effects of
these efforts and future directions relative to Secure and Fair Enforcement (SAFE) Act
compliance.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Scope of the Escrow Business
2. Escrow: The Profession and the People
3. Opening the Escrow
4. Title Insurance: Consumers and Real Estate Professionals
5. Title Insurance: Technical Documents
6. Seller’s Escrow and Liens
7. Loan Escrow and Buyer Escrow
8. Loan Escrows

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

9. Preparing Documents
10. Processing and Disclosures
11. Preparing to Close: Escrow Math
12. Post-closing Procedures
13. Special Escrows: Homestead, Probate, Foreign Investors, and For Sale by
Owner
14. Specialty Residential Property
15. Nonresidential Specialties
Total Hours

4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Field Trips
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Written Practice Settlement Sheets (for Buyers and Sellers)
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material about processing and disclosures. Prepare for a discussion of how
to avoid foreclosures, liens and judgments on real estate transactions.
2. Read the text material about the scope of the escrow business. Prepare to share in class
what you learned about the escrow process and the steps necessary to open and close an
escrow.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze a preliminary title report and inspect it for potential problem areas. Write a 3-5
page report (following a specified format) detailing your findings.
2. Appraise the validity of a legal document required for the transfer of title. Write a 1-2
page report summarizing your findings.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Apply principles of escrow procedures to prepare documents in a simulated real estate
transaction. Create a closing statement for a buyer that matches the HUD statement (up to
4 pages long). Include pertinent information relating to proration of taxes, loan interest,
rents and insurance.
2. Apply principles of escrow procedures to prepare documents in a simulated real estate
transaction. Create a closing statement for a seller that matches the HUD statement (up to
4 pages long). Include pertinent information relating to proration of taxes, loan interest,
rents and insurance.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Shindler Price, S.. Escrow Principles and Practices. 5th Edition. Ashley Crown Systems, 2007.
B. Grogan, D.. California Real Estate Escrow. 1st (Updated) Edition. Dearborn, 2007.
C. Huber, W. & Newton, J.. Real Estate Escrow. 1st Edition. Educational Textbook Company, Inc.,
2010.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

