BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RLS 60 - Real Estate Mortgage Brokerage
Prerequisite(s): RLS 20 (or concurrent enrollment)
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

The course is an introduction to Mortgage Brokerage: how it works and how mortgage brokers can
assist home-buyers in finding the right loan. Topics include the Secure and Fair Enforcement (SAFE)
Act (signed into law as part of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA) of 2008) and the
Dodd-Frank Act and their impacts on mortgage lending practices and professionals, including the new
professional designation of Mortgage Loan Originator (MLO). This course can fulfill an elective
course requirement of the California Department of Real Estate (DRE) for those taking the Real Estate
Salesperson and Broker Exams.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify federal organizations that are key players in the mortgage marketplace.
B. Describe key components to loans applications, loan packages and closing loan transactions.
C. Construct a sample loan package for review by a broker.
D. Compare and contrast government loans and non-government mortgages.
E. Estimate Federal and State income tax advantages for home owners.
F. Identify and describe mortgage fraud and foreclosure issues, such as falsifying information on
mortgage loan applications, mishandled loan modifications and procedural defects in the
foreclosure process.
G. Analyze the ethical considerations associated with working within the Mortgage Brokerage
business.
H. Explain the provisions of the Secure and Fair Enforcement (SAFE) Act, signed into law as part
of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA) of 2008, including its requirements
relating to transparency and full disclosure.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Mortgage Broker
2. The Mortgage Marketplace (Including Discussion of Impact of the Secure
and Fair Enforcement (SAFE) Act)
3. Getting Started as a Loan Agent
4. The Primary Mortgage Market
5. The Secondary Mortgage Market
6. Interviews with the Loan Applicant
7. The Loan Application
8. Loan Applications Disclosures
9. The Art of Packaging a Loan
10. Closing the Loan

Hours
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00

11. Government-Sponsored Financing
12. Tax Advantages of Home Ownership
13. Property Appraisal and Insurance
14. Mortgage Fraud and Foreclosure
Total Hours

4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Field Trips
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Homework
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material about the Secure and Fair Enforcement (SAFE) Act, signed into
law as part of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA) of 2008. Identify the
purposes of the SAFE Act and the minimum standards it establishes for state licensing and
registration of residential Mortgage Loan Originators (MLOs) and be prepared to present
what you learned in class.
2. Read the text material about the Dodd-Frank Act, and search for pertinent information
online. Prepare for in-class discussion of its impacts on mortgage brokers, including
ongoing professional development and certification requirements.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research, then write a 2-3 page paper about the differences between a mortgage broker
and a retail lender. From a borrower's perspective, what are the advantages and
disadvantages of each?
2. Interview a mortgage broker, using the interview outline provided. Write a 3-5 page paper
detailing your findings.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare a sample loan package (approximately 65 pages) containing all documentation
generated from the client interview through the closure, in the correct stacking order.
2. Complete assigned ratio problems relating to a prospective borrower's income. Present
your computations in a spreadsheet, making sure to clearly identify various debts and
sources of income, as well as the ratio calculations. You will submit a 1 page grid with
8-10 pages of addenda.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Grogan, D.L and Chambers, M.C.. California Mortgage Loan Brokering and Lending. 4th

Edition. Cengage Publishing, 2011.
B. Andrew, T. B., & Williams, M. R.. California Mortgage Loan Brokerage. Dearborn, 2008.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

