BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RLS 45 - Real Estate Economics
Prerequisite(s): RLS 20 (or concurrent enrollment)
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides students with a basic understanding of economic factors that affect residential,
commercial, industrial, rural and special purpose real estate. The focus is on financing and government
policy; urban development and renewal; regulation of land use; business and real estate cycles and
mortgage markets and their impact on real estate and investment opportunities. This course satisfies
the California Department of Real Estate (DRE) requirement that students pass a college-level “Real
Estate Economics” course prior to taking the Real Estate Broker License Exam. It can also count as the
optional course that students must pass prior to taking the California Real Estate Salesperson License
Exam.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Effectively use terminology relating to real estate economics and apply key real estate
economics concepts to describe, explain and predict patterns of real estate prices, supply and
demand.
B. Analyze and evaluate local, state and national economic trends as they affect market regions and
influence real estate prices.
C. Describe the "economics of real property" as it pertains to property values and patterns of use.
D. Identify and describe the impact of economic-related factors to be considered when making real
estate decisions: building cycles, site valuation, depreciation, property income and expenses,
capitalization rates and capitalization processes.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Economic Systems and Principles
2. Supply and Demand
3. Economic Change Analysis
4. Money and Monetary Policy
5. The Real Estate Market
6. The U.S. Housing Market
7. California’s Economic Profile
8. The California Real Estate Market
9. Land Use Planning and Development
10. Fair Housing and Environmental Regulations
11. Financing and Taxation
12. The Economics of Real Estate Investment

Hours
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
3.00

13. The Economics of Appraisal
14. Analyzing Residential Income Property
15. Analyzing Commercial Investment Property
Total Hours

4.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Case analysis
G. Class Project
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material on the real estate market. Prepare for in-class discussion of the
types of real estate markets.
2. Read the text material about the SAFE Mortgage Licensing Act and the Mortgage
Disclosure Improvement Act. Conduct on-line research for additional information on
these topics. Prepare for in-class discussion about their impacts on the mortgage lending
industry.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Identify and describe key current national, state and local economic indicators and/or
issues. Write a 5 page paper identifying and discussing the effect of each on the California
real estate market.
2. Write a 3-5 page report comparing and contrasting city-subsidized and Community
Housing Improvement Program (CHIP) housing programs.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Use economic analysis to support a rational real estate decision regarding purchase and
investment. Analyze a list of possible real estate investment opportunities given an
analysis of the current (and projected) economic environment. Calculate and assess cash
flows and rates of return (ROR). This report will be 6-10 pages long.
2. Conduct in-depth research about an economic factor (e.g. unemployment) that impacts the
real estate market. Describe current trends relative to this factor and its impact on real
estate prices, supply and demand. Identify the impact of this factor on various participants
in the real estate market: owners, renters, developers, renovators, financial institutions,
real estate brokers, attorneys and others. Write up your research in a 6-20 page paper.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gonzalez, I.. California Real Estate Economics. 4th Edition. Dearborn, 2010.
B. McKenzie, D.J., Betts, R.M. and Jensen, C.A.. Essentials of Real Estate Economics. 6th Edition.

B. McKenzie, D.J., Betts, R.M. and Jensen, C.A.. Essentials of Real Estate Economics. 6th Edition.
Cengage Learning, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

