BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RLS 20 - Real Estate Principles
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This introductory course provides students with an overview of the real estate industry, basic real
estate terminology, fundamental economic principles applicable to the real estate industry, and
professional and ethical challenges experienced by real estate professionals. The course introduces the
fundamental principles of real estate ownership, transfer, financing, evaluation, agency law and
contracts. This course satisfies the California Department of Real Estate (DRE) requirement that
students pass a college-level “Real Estate Principles” course prior to taking the Real Estate
Salesperson License Exam. This course can also count as one of the three optional courses that
students must pass prior to taking the California Real Estate Broker License Exam.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define and use common terminology used in the real estate industry.
B. Describe the benefits and challenges of a career as a real estate professional, including the role
of continuing education.
C. Identify and discuss professional and ethical considerations in the Real Estate Industry as they
relate to buyers, sellers, real estate professionals and the community.
D. Outline the requirements and the steps in obtaining California Department of Real Estate (DRE)
Salesperson, Broker’s and Appraiser's licenses.
E. Analyze laws that apply to real estate ownership, transactions and agency.
F. Explain the fundamental principles of economics as they apply to the real estate industry and
market.
G. Solve basic mathematical problems relating to real estate, analyzing the outcomes of alternative
real estate decisions.
H. Compare and contrast the financing options available to a buyer, including loan types, lending
institutions and government programs.
I. Explain the steps in the process of transferring ownership of real estate, including the escrow
procedure.
J. Discuss the California Secure and Fair Enforcement (SAFE) Act legislation, its requirements for
mortgage loan originators and its benefits to individuals and businesses engaging in real estate
transactions.
K. Complete a sample sales listing and sales contract.
L. Demonstrate a basic understanding of the appraisal process and explain its fundamental impact
on closing all real estate transactions.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Business of Real Estate
2. The Nature of Real Property
3. Ownership/Transfer of Real Property

Hours
4.00
3.00
3.00

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Ownership/Transfer of Real Property
Encumbrances and Liens
Real Estate Agency
Deposit Receipts and Disclosures
Real Estate Contracts
Introduction to Real Estate Finance (including Goverment Sponsored
Finance)
9. Real Estate Mathematics
10. The Role of Title and Escrow Companies
11. Introduction to Real Estate Taxation
12. Leases and Landlord/Tenant Relations
13. Real Estate Appraisal
14. Residential Design and Construction
15. Government Land-Use Planning and Other Public Controls
Total Hours

3.00
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
8.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Projects
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Case Analysis
H. Multiple choice exams comparable to the California licensing exam
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material pertaining to the escrow process. Prepare for in-class discussion of
each step involved in a simple real estate escrow transaction.
2. Read the text material pertaining to government land use. Contact the city and/or county
for additional information. Prepare for in-class discussion of this topic.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a financing statement (approximately 2-5 pages) for the purchase of a single
family residence, including a comparison of available financing options.
2. Conduct research and prepare a basic Comparative Market Analysis (CMA) (1 page grid)
for a residential property using the specified format. Identify and describe comparable
listings, both recently sold, currently on the market, and expired. Based on analysis,

propose a listing price.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Attend a real estate open house. Ask questions of the realtor and submit a 2 page report
including a flyer for the property and addressing the following: name of listing and sitting
agent(s); how the realtor arrived at the sale price (e.g., competitive market analysis
(CMA), comparables, seller demand) and why the property is being sold. Would you be
interested in buying this property? Why or why not?
2. Conduct an interview with a local real estate professional. Write a 5 page report detailing
the information provided to you, particularly as it relates to the various real estate career
options of interest to you.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Stapleton, C.O. and Williams, M.R.. California Real Estate Principles. 8th Edition. Dearborn
Financial Press, 2011.
B. McKenzie, D.J., Brady, M.E. and Estes, E.. California Real Estate Principles. 9th Edition.
Cengage Learning, 2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Other appropriate collegiate level textbooks and materials of instruction may be used for this
course.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

