BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RLS 25 - Real Estate Practices
Prerequisite(s): RLS 20 (or concurrent enrollment)
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course provides students with necessary skills to engage in the day-to-day activities of a licensed
real estate salesperson. Students are provided with a practical, legal and ethical foundation regarding
social interactions; prospecting and obtaining listings; selling and advertising techniques; negotiating;
financing and completing standardized real estate forms. This course satisfies the California
Department of Real Estate (DRE) requirement that students pass a “Real Estate Practices” course prior
to taking both the Real Estate Salesperson and Broker License Exams.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify various employment opportunities in real estate, including real estate agency
relationships between broker and salesperson.
B. Identify and evaluate legal, professional and ethical considerations impacting real estate
professional, including issues such as mandatory disclosures, fair housing and trust funds.
C. Apply the real estate prospecting process to secure buyers and sellers.
D. Describe the required content included in each component of standard real estate listing and
purchase agreements.
E. Use the process of property evaluation for marketing purposes and obtain a salable listing.
F. Explain the methods of advertising and marketing for various types of properties.
G. Identify the elements involved in real estate financing and perform necessary calculations in
order to complete real estate transactions.
H. Demonstrate how to close a sale by communicating effectively, overcoming objections, and
negotiating for the seller’s signature on a listing agreement and/or the purchaser’s signature on a
sales agreement.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Getting Started in Real Estate
2. Ethics, Fair Housing, Trust Funds and Other Legal Issues
3. Mandatory Disclosures
4. Prospecting and Business Development
5. Listing Presentation Package
6. Listing Presentations
7. Servicing the Listing
8. Advertising
9. The Buyer and the Property Showing
10. Obtaining the Offer and Creating the Sales Agreement
11. From Offer to Closing

Hours
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
4.00

12. Real Estate Financing
13. Escrow and Title Insurance
14. Taxation
15. Property Management and Leasing
Total Hours

4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Field Trips
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Discussion
H. Case analyses
I. Role Play
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text information about real estate financing. In preparation for the California
Real Estate licensing exam, use a calculator to solve problems involving Principal,
Interest, Taxes and Insurance (PITI) and interest only payment options; amortization;
combo loans; (Adjustable Rate Mortages) ARMs; and rent vs. buy comparisons.
2. Read the text information pertaining to statutes and regulations relating to the real estate
industry, including those pertaining to mandatory disclosures. Identify and describe the
components of mandatory disclosure forms in preparation for class discussion and role
play.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Design a 3 page prospecting plan for getting new listings, using the report format
provided.
2. Select a residential property (1-4 units), research then write a 3 page report summarizing
property management and leasing options.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare a seller’s net sheet and a buyer’s net sheet (2 pages, total), based on estimates of
closing costs, commissions, interest, proration, title insurance fees, property and income
taxes.
2. Create a 35-40 page listing proposal report and presentation. Provide details about (and
sample materials showing) how you will market and show the property and maintain
weekly client contact. Describe for the seller the steps in the process from offer to closing;
and financing options and the financing process.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Herd, R.L. and Southstone, B.A.. California Real Estate Practice. 2nd Edition. Cengage
Learning, 2011.
B. Pivar, W.H., Anderson, L. and Otto, D.S.. California Real Estate Practice. 7th Edition.
Dearborn, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Appropriate supplementary materials, as appropriate

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

