BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RLS 35 - Real Estate Appraisal
Prerequisite(s): RLS 20 (or concurrent enrollment)
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to real estate valuation, with an emphasis on residential real estate.
The course covers basic real estate appraisal principles, the systematic appraisal process, different
approaches to estimating value and factors affecting market value (including the economic
environment). In addition, students will learn about the role and responsibilities of the professional
appraiser, trends in the appraisal industry and the process of preparing an appraisal report. This course
satisfies the California Department of Real Estate (DRE) requirement that students pass a
college-level “Real Estate Appraisal” course prior to taking the Real Estate Broker License Exam. It
can also count as the optional course that students must pass prior to taking the California Real Estate
Salesperson License Exam. This course also meets the license requirements of the 2008 Appraisal
Qualifications Board of the Appraisal Foundation and is required for the appraisal trainee license,
residential license, certified residential license and certified general license.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Effectively use, comprehend and explain the terminology associated with the appraisal process.
B. Identify and describe the impact of social, economic, governmental and environmental forces on
property value.
C. Describe the purpose, steps and outcomes of the appraisal process.
D. List and discuss the classic economic principles used in determining real estate value.
E. Describe each of the traditional approaches to estimating market value (sales comparison, cost
and income) and use each approach to generate estimates of market value for a particular
residential property.
F. Evaluate the results of the three appraisal approaches to estimating market value (sales
comparison, cost and income), then derive the final value opinion.
G. Conduct the research necessary to complete a single-family residential appraisal.
H. Write an appraisal report for a residential property, following the Uniform Residential Appraisal
Report (URAR) format.
I. Identify challenges faced by the real estate appraiser and describe appropriate legal and ethical
professional conduct, particularly as specified in the Uniform Standards of Professional
Appraisal Practice (USPAP).
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Real Estate Appraisal
2. Understanding Real Estate Value
3. The Appraisal Process
4. Property Description and Appraisal Math

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

5. Data Collection and Analysis
6. Site Valuation
7. Residential Construction
8. Cost Approach to Value
9. Sales Comparison Approach to Value
10. Income Approach to Value
11. Determining Highest and Best Use
12. Appraising Special Interests
13. The Appraisal Report
14. The Appraisal Profession, Including Legal and Ethical Considerations
Total Hours

6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Class Activities
C. Field Trips
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Guest speakers from the real estate or financing profession
G. Class Project
H. Case Analysis
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the text material about appraising special interests, then prepare for an in-class
discussion of the “bundle of rights” concept.
2. Read the text material pertaining to environmental factors influencing property values. Do
some on-line research about the local real estate market. Prepare for an in-class discussion
of current social, economic, governmental and environmental factors influencing local
property values.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 3-5 page paper defining “highest and best use.” Identify the criteria used in
determining highest and best use, and describe its role in appraisal.
2. Write a 3-5 page report describing the role played by the professional appraiser. Identify
several situations that might present ethical challenges to him/her, and identify the
appropriate response to each given legal, ethical and professional considerations. Be
prepared to justify your responses.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Write an appraisal report for a residential property (20-30 pages including addenda),
following the Uniform Residential Appraisal Report (URAR) format. Use the three

approaches to value, then derive a final value opinion. Justify your decision.
2. Research requirements of Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP)
as to what must be included in a Uniform Residential Appraisal Report (URAR). Please
note: these requirements are updated annually. Write up your findings in a 3-5 page
report, using the format provided.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Schram, Jr., J.F. and Ely, S.J.. Real Estate Appraisal. 6th Edition. Rockwell Publishing, 2012.
B. Ventolo, W.L. and Williams, M.R., JD. Fundamentals of Real Estate Appraisal. 11th Edition.
Dearborn, 2012.

Created/Revised by: Donna Weaver
Date: 04/01/2013

