BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 135 - Fundamentals of Clinical Respiratory Care
Prerequisite(s): RT 120, RT 125, RT 128
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
30 hours Lecture
96 hours Lab

3.75 Unit(s)

This course is a supervised clinical respiratory therapy experience in the hospital setting, including the
application of theories and therapeutic modalities taught in previous RT classes. Mechanical
Ventilation concepts will be introduced in the lecture portion. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Differentiate the appropriateness of therapy in relation to diagnosis and patient condition and
explain the rationale for specific therapeutic modalities administered to the patient and RCP
faculty/staff.
B. Apply clinical decision making in the care of acute and chronic non-ICU and ICU patients.
C. Apply the basic concepts of mechanical ventilation to their use in the critical care setting.
D. Recognize basic cardiac arrhythmias through the interpretation of ECG monitoring.
E. Demonstrate competency levels in the following areas: Oxygen Administration, Humidity and
Aerosol Therapy, Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) sampling, Arterial Line sampling, Tracheostomy
Care, Inline Suctioning, Nasotracheal Suctioning (optional), Tracheal Suctioning (optional),
Non-Invasive Ventilation Check, and Inline Small Volume Nebulizer or metered dose inhaler
(MDI).
F. Demonstrate clinical data gathering, interpretation, and understanding of patient
pathophysiology through the completion of patient assessment presentations.
G. Apply the basic assessment, patient education, and treatment skills introduced in RT 120 and RT
125 to to the care of acute and chronic non-ICU patients and ICU patients.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Endotracheal intubation
2. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation
3. Introduction to mechanical ventilation
4. Initial ventilator settings
5. Waveform analysis
6. Ventilator troubleshooting
Total Hours

Hours
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
30.00

Lab
Topics
1.
Oxygen Administration

Hours
8.00

1.
Oxygen Administration
2.
Humidity and Aerosol Therapy
3.
Arterial Blood Gas Sampling
4.
Non-Invasive Ventilation Check
5.
Tracheostomy Care
6.
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
7.
Introduction to Mechanical Ventilator Check
8.
Inline Small Volume Nebulizer
9.
Inline Suctioning
10. Arterial Line Sampling
Total Hours

8.00
12.00
6.00
8.00
12.00
8.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
6.00
96.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations
F. Reading Assignments
G. Laboratory Experiments
H. Bedside administration of procedures to patients with faculty observation and
assistance.
I. Demonstration of student competencies (Performance Evaluations)
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Practical Evaluations
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. Class Discussion
G. Hospital staff input regarding student performance
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned readings on Non-Invasive Positive Pressure Ventilation and be
prepared to participate in classroom discussion of the topic.
2. Read the assigned readings on Endotracheal Intubation and be prepared to participate in
classroom discussion of the topic.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a Patient Assessment form on the patient assigned by your clinical instructor,
using the patient's chart and a bedside assessment of the patient.
2. Complete the fill-in questions in the handout on Endotracheal Intubation, ensuring an
instructor has checked off all required competencies before submission.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete a Data Arc Daily Log for the procedures completed in each laboratory section.
2. Complete a Data Arc Daily Log for each clinical rotation, including the day's most
significant experience, physician interactions, and an accounting of the procedures

performed.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cairo, J.M., Pilbeam, S.. Mosby’s Respiratory Care Equipment. 9th Edition. Mosby, 2013.
B. Wilkins, R.. Egan’s Fundamentals of Respiratory Care. 10th Edition. Mosby, 2013.
C. Wilkins. Clinical Assessment in Respiratory Care. 7th Edition. Mosby, 2013.
D. Pilbeam, S.. Mechanical Ventilation: Physiologic and Clinical Applications. 5th Edition. Mosby,
2012.
E. Corning, H., et al.. Mosby’s Respiratory Care PDQ. 2nd Edition. Mosby, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. American Association for Respiratory Care, Clinical Practice Guidelines, at www.aarc.org
B. Required Equipment:
1. Name Badge
2. Stethoscope
3. Watch with seconds display
4. Approved scrub outfit
5. Working pen and pencil
6. Approved eye protection
7. Bandage scissors
8. Small spiral-bound pocket notebook

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 09/29/2014

