BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 145 - Advanced Respiratory Care Procedures
Prerequisite(s): RT 135
Co-requisite(s): RT 140, RT 142
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
272 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This course is designed to support continued in-hospital development of clinical respiratory care skills
with emphasis on the application of scientific principles to the therapeutic environment and life
support of the critically ill patient. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Schedule respiratory care to be delivered to critically ill patients, based on the acuity of need.
B. Apply previously learned concepts of respiratory care modalities, patient education, and
medications to patients who are critically ill.
C. Perform cardiopulmonary assessment of critically ill patients.
D. Demonstrate a fundamental knowledge of the operation of mechanical ventilators.
E. Demonstrate competency in Securing an Artificial Airway, Cuff Pressure Management,
Ventilator Set-up (optional), Waveform Graphics Analysis, Ventilator Parameter Change,
Weaning Parameters (optional), Intubation, Extubation, Weaning, Ventilator Check, Transport
with Oxygen, End-Tidal C02 Monitoring (optional), and Manual Ventilation during Transport
or Transport Ventilator Set-up.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Invasive cardiopulmonary monitoring
2. Operation and troubleshooting of mechanical ventilators
3. Cardiopulmonary assessment of the critically ill patients
4. Maintenance of artificial airways
5. Emergency procedures within the critical care environment
6. Modification of mechanical ventilator settings based on patient response
7. Initiating mechanical ventilation
8. Weaning from mechanical ventilation
9. Transport of the mechanically ventilated patient
Total Hours

Hours
26.00
72.00
30.00
20.00
22.00
32.00
20.00
25.00
25.00
272.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
E. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Demonstration
E. Homework
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Performance Examinations
I. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Thoroughly review all sections of the patient's chart in preparation for presenting the
patient during ICU grand rounds.
2. Read the information provided on your Data Arc disc regarding the competency,
Monitoring Mechanical Ventilation, and come to next clinic section prepared to be
checked off on this competency.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete an Adult Daily Log in Data Arc indicating the amount and type of procedures
performed during each clinical shift, physician interactions, and providing a narrative on
the day's most significant experiences.
2. Fill out a Critical Care Adult Assessment form, using the patient's chart, a bedside patient
assessment, and information obtained from the patient's nurse to complete.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cairo JM, Pilbeam SP. Mosby’s Respiratory Care Equipment. 9th Edition. Mosby, 2013.
B. Pilbeam, SP, Cairo JM.. Mechanical Ventilation: Physiologic and Clinical Applications. 5th
Edition. Mosby, 2012.
C. Wilkins RL, Sheldon RL, Krider SJ. Clinical Assessment in Respiratory Care. 7th Edition.
Mosby, 2013.
D. Wilkins RL, Stoller JK, Scanlan CL. Egan’s Fundamentals of Respiratory Care. 10th Edition.
Mosby, 2012.
E. Corning, H., et al.. Mosby’s Respiratory Care PDQ. 2nd Edition. Mosby, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. AARC Clinical Practice Guidelines
B. Required Equipment:
1. Name Badge
2. Stethoscope

3. Watch with seconds display
4. Approved scrub outfit
5. Working pen and pencil
6. Approved eye protection
7. Bandage scissors
8. Small spiral-bound pocket notebook

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 09/29/2014

