BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 142 - Neonatal and Pediatric Respiratory Care
Prerequisite(s): RT 135
Co-requisite(s): RT 140, RT 145
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to respiratory care of the neonatal and pediatric patient. Emphasis is
placed upon growth and development, pathophysiology, clinical assessment, treatment, resuscitation
and mechanical ventilatory support. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify factors which indicate a high risk pregnancy/delivery, be prepared to assist in neonatal
resuscitation, and provide education to the parents as appropriate.
B. Recognize the common neonatal respiratory disease syndromes and describe the appropriate
respiratory management skills for each.
C. Assess the neonatal/pediatric patient, applying normal and abnormal vital signs and laboratory
test results to the clinical situation.
D. Describe the key components of the management of a patient who requires positive pressure
mechanical ventilation.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Cardiopulmonary Anatomy and Physiology of the Fetus and Newborn
2. Prenatal Assessment
3. Cardiopulmonary Assessment of the Neonate and Child
4. Cardiopulmonary Pathophysiology of the Neonate and Child
5. Cardiopulmonary Monitoring of the Neonate and Child
6. Oxygen Therapy/ Bronchial Hygiene Therapy/ Airway Management/
Resuscitation Principles of Neonate and Child
7. Mechanical Respiratory Support of the Newborn
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
12.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Demonstrations

F. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Final Examination
E. Written Examinations
F. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned readings on Fetal Development and be prepared to participate in a
classroom discussion on the topic.
2. Read the assigned readings on Prenatal Assessment and be prepared to participate in a
classroom discussion on this topic.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete all the items listed on the Learning Objectives, Cardiopulmonary Anatomy and
Physiology of the Fetus and Newborn.
2. Complete all the items listed on the Learning Objectives, Prenatal Assessment.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete the Review Questions in the Neonatal Resuscitation Textbook for Chapters 1
and 2.
2. Complete the Review Questions in the Neonatal Resuscitation Textbook for Chapters 3
and 4.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Barnhart SL, Czervinske MP. Perinatal and Pediatric Respiratory Care. 3rd Edition. Saunders
Elsevier, 2010.
B. Des Jardins, Terry. Cardioplumonary Anatomy and Physiology. 5th Edition. Delmar, 2008.
C. Oakes D. Neonatal/Pediatric Respiratory Care: A Critical Care Pocket Guide. 6th Edition.
Health Educators Publishers, 2009.
D. Cairo, J.M., Pilbeam, S.. Mosby’s Respiratory Care Equipment. 8th Edition. Mosby, 2010.
E. Bloom, Ronald S.. Neonatal Resuscitation Textbook. 6th Edition. American Academy of
Pediatrics , 2011.

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 04/02/2012

