BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 115 - Clinical Preparation for Respiratory Care
Prerequisite(s): RT 110, ENGL 2, CMST 2 or CMST 4
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
36 hours Lab

0.75 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the basic concepts of clinical respiratory care as practiced in the acute
care hospital. Students will become conversant with bedside examination, monitoring, and care of
medical / surgical and respiratory disease patients.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate appropriate patient interaction, assessment and treatment skills used in bedside
respiratory patient care at the basic level.
B. Demonstrate minimal competency levels in Hand washing, Isolation and Infection Control
Procedures, Vital Signs Assessment. Oxygen Supply Systems. Oxygen Administration, Small
Volume Nebulizer (SVN) Therapy, Incentive Spirometry, Pulse Oximetry, Cough Techniques
and Effectiveness, and Patient safety, positioning, and operation of hospital beds
C. Recognize and describe the components of a medical chart, and be able to recall the proper
procedure for charting and reporting a respiratory care treatment.
D. Demonstrate the proper procedure for using a syringe to draw up respiratory care medication.
E. Describe the correct procedure for respiratory care medication administration, including the "Six
Rights".
F. Recognize the sounds associated with normal and abnormal breath sounds.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Introduction Vital Signs, Blood Pressure
2. Review SVN, Oxygen Therapy
3. Pulse Oximetry
4. Infection Control and Isolation
5. Coughing and Breathing Exercises
6. Safe Lifting/Movement of Patients Fire and Electrical Safety
7. Medical Charting
8. Breath Sound Assessment
9. Medication Administration
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
36.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Demonstrations
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
I. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Demonstration
C. Lab Projects
D. Final Examination
E. Practical Evaluations
F. Direct observation of the students' bedside patient assessment and care.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned reading for Pulse oximetry in preparation for classroom and laboratory
practice in obtaining an Sp02.
2. Read the assigned reading for Vital signs in preparation for classroom discussion and
laboratory practice of pulse rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure and temperature.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After completing the assigned reading and classroom presentations on Pulse Oximetry,
answer each item listed under the Pulse Oximetry Learning Objectives.
2. After completing the assigned reading, classroom presentations, and laboratory practice on
Vital Signs, answer each item listed under the Vital Signs Learning Objectives.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete an Adult Daily Log for the procedures completed in the Vital Signs laboratory.
2. Set up your student account in Data Arc by changing your Username and Password and by
providing the required personal information under the My Info section.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cairo, J.M., et al. Mosby's Respiratory Care Equipment. 8th Edition. Mosby, 2010.
B. Scanlan, C., et al. Egan’s Fundamentals of Respiratory Care. 9th Edition. Mosby, 2009.
C. Wilkins. Clinical Assessment in Respiratory Care. 6th Edition. Mosby, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Data Arc CD
B. AARC Clinical Practice Guidelines. Available at www.aarc.org

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 04/02/2012

