BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 155 - Respiratory Care Practicum I
Prerequisite(s): RT 140, RT 142, RT 145
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
118 hours Lab

2.25 Unit(s)

This course is designed as a clinical experience to allow the respiratory care student to hone skills
learned in previous RT courses while developing new skills in the performance of day-to-day tasks of
the staff respiratory care practitioner. Critique of clinical performance by hospital personnel is a
component part of grading for this course. Offered in Winter Session only. Travel to out-of-area
clinical facilities will be required. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Categorize clinical tasks into a plan that provides both required therapy and allowance for
contingencies.
B. Practice communication skills so that economy and effectiveness are provided for inter- and
intra-departmental communication.
C. Employ assessment skills learned in previous clinical courses on a variety of patient populations,
and provide appropriate patient education as indicated under the guidance of a licensed
respiratory care practitioner.
D. Practice neonatal and pediatric assessment skills in a Level III neonatal intensive care unit
(NICU) and a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU).
E. Practice neonatal and pediatric respiratory procedures in a NICU and PICU, including the
management of mechanical ventilation.
F. Apply the skills learned in the American Academy of Pediatrics Neonatal Resuscitation Program
course to a delivery room resuscitation situation, under the guidance of a licensed respiratory
care practitioner.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Neonatal Resuscitation Program
2. Pediatric/perinatal respiratory care
3. Respiratory care of the non-surgical patient
Post-trauma respiratory care
Respiratory emergencies
Pre-surgical and post-surgical respiratory care
Total Hours

Hours
8.00
50.00
60.00

118.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Field Experience/Internship
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Problem-Solving Sessions
E. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review Chapters 1-5, 7-9 in your Neonatal Resuscitation Program Textbook from RT 142
to prepare for your certification class in neonatal resuscitation.
2. Perform an internet research on the neonatal disease research paper topic assigned to you
by your clinical instructor.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a Neonatal Daily Log for each day you are in a scheduled rotation in the
neonatal intensive care, providing an accounting of each procedure performed, physician
interactions, and a narrative of the days most significant events.
2. Write a neonatal disease research paper, using the guidelines provided, on the subject
matter provided by your clinical instructor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Oakes D. Neonatal/Pediatric Respiratory Care: A Critical Care Pocket Guide. 6th Edition.
Health Educators Publishers, 2009.
B. Bloom, Ronald S.. Neonatal Resuscitation Textbook. 6th Edition. American Academy of
Pediatrics, 2011.
C. Corning, H., et al.. Mosby’s Respiratory Care PDQ. 2nd Edition. Mosby, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 04/02/2012

