BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 125 - Introduction to Clinical Respiratory Care
Prerequisite(s): RT 115
Co-requisite(s): RT 120, RT 128, BCIS 33
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
272 hours Lab

5 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to the basic concepts of clinical respiratory care as practiced in the acute
care hospital. Students will become conversant with bedside examination, monitoring, and care of
medical/surgical and respiratory disease patients. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate knowledge of appropriateness of therapy in relation to diagnosis and patient
condition, the ability to explain the rationale for specific therapeutic modalities, and how to
appropriately educate the patient on each of the above.
B. Describe the hazards/complications associated with arterial blood gas sampling procedures
through program testing and competency assessment.
C. Demonstrate selected clinical competencies appropriate to each students experience level, and
available clinical patient care.
D. Employ clinical decision making in the care of acute and chronic medical/surgical, and patients
with respiratory disorders.
E. Employ basic patient interaction, education, assessment and treatment skills used in bedside
respiratory patient care.
F. Distinguish basic principles of health care ethics, as they apply to the respiratory care
practitioner (RCP).
G. Demonstrate competency in hand washing, isolation and infection control procedures, vital signs
assessment, chest assessment, small volume nebulizer (SVN) therapy, incentive spirometry (IS),
pulse oximetry, intermittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB) or EzPAP, mucus clearing
adjuncts, and metered dose inhaler (MDI) or dry powder inhaler (DPI).
H. Gather and interpret clinical data from a patient care chart through the correct completion of a
written Patient Care Worksheet (PCW).
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Due to the day-to-day uncertainty of availability of specific categories of patients and treatment
modalities, student will be exposed to the following units in variable order as they become
available in a given clinical facility.
Lab
Topics
1.
Hospital Orientation I
2.
Hand Washing
3.
Small Volume Nebulizer Therapy
4.
Vital Signs

Hours
16.00
8.00
32.00
36.00

5.
Isolation and Infection Control Procedures
6.
Chest Assessment
7.
Hospital Orientation II
8.
IPPB or EzPAP
9.
Mucus Clearing Adjuncts
10. Incentive Spirometry
11. Pulse Oximetry
12. MDI or DPI
Total Hours

36.00
54.00
8.00
16.00
16.00
16.00
16.00
18.00
272.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Demonstrations
E. Problem-Solving Sessions
F. Reading Assignments
G. Bedside administration of procedures to patients with Faculty
observation and assistance.
H. Individual and group discussion
I. Written Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Demonstration
E. Practical Evaluations
F. Hospital staff input regarding student performance
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the provided material on the competencies assigned by your clinical instructor
PRIOR to your next scheduled clinical rotation in preparation for competency check offs.
2. Review the patient's chart for current doctor's order, diagnosis, lab values and chest x-ray
results prior to delivering assigned therapy to be prepared for any contingencies with the
patient.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Utilizing your assigned patient's medical chart, complete a Patient Care Worksheet form.
2. Write a disease research paper on the topic provided for you, using guidelines posted in
Blackboard for this assignment.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not Applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cairo, J.M., Pilbeam, S.. Mosby’s Respiratory Care Equipment. 9th Edition. Mosby, 2013.
B. Wilkins, R.. Egan’s Fundamentals of Respiratory Care. 10th Edition. Mosby, 2012.
C. Wilkins. Clinical Assessment in Respiratory Care. 7th Edition. Mosby, 2013.

D. Corning, H., et al. . Mosby’s Respiratory Care PDQ. 2nd Edition. Mosby, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. American Association for Respiratory Care, Clinical Practice Guidelines, at www.aarc.org.
B. Selected references from medical periodicals
C. Selected computer assisted instruction programs
D. Required Equipment:
1. Name Badge
2. Stethoscope
3. Watch with seconds display
4. Approved scrub outfit
5. Working pen and pencil
6. Approved eye protection
7. Bandage scissors
8. Small spiral-bound pocket notebook

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 09/29/2014

