BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 165 - Respiratory Care Practicum II
Prerequisite(s): RT 155
Co-requisite(s): RT 160
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
408 hours Lab

8 Unit(s)

This course supports the continuing practice and evaluation of skills for advanced respiratory care
students in the hospital setting. Development of skills pertaining to the organization and completion of
patient care assignments in both the medical-surgical and critical care environments are emphasized.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Employ effective communication skills as they pertain to patient interaction and education of
the patient.
B. Employ basic patient triage skills in the clinical setting, under the guidance of a licensed
respiratory care practitioner.
C. Apply the skills learned in previous clinical courses in the treatment of critically ill patients,
under the guidance of a licensed respiratory care practitioner.
D. Apply the patient assessment skills learned in previous clinical courses in the treatment of
critically ill patients, under the guidance of a licensed respiratory care practitioner.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Introduction to home respiratory therapy
2. Introduction to Sleep Studies
3. Introduction to Pulmonary Rehabilitation
4. Introduction to Sub-acute SNF/Rehabilitation hospitals
5. Working directly with a pulmonogist in their office assessing outpatients
6. Respiratory care of the pre-surgical patient
7. Respiratory care of the post-surgical patient
8. Specialized care of the thoracic surgery patient
9. Respiratory care of the medical-surgical floor patient
10. Post trauma respiratory care
11. Respiratory care of the medical-surgical intensive care patient
12. Pediatric/perinatal respiratory care
13. Respiratory emergencies
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
4.00
47.00
47.00
47.00
47.00
47.00
47.00
47.00
47.00
408.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Field Experience/Internship
B. Problem-Solving Sessions
C. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Performance Examinations
B. Practical Evaluations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review the patient's chart prior to treatment delivery for current doctor's order, diagnosis,
lab values and chest x-ray results.
2. Review your assigned patients' charts to gather the required information needed to
accurately present your patients' current condition to the physicians and other health care
professionals (HCP's) in intensive care unit (ICU) grand rounds.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete a Daily Log in Data Arc indicating the amount and type of procedures
performed during each clinical shift, physician interactions, and write a narrative on the
day's most significant experiences.
2. Using the Situation/Background/Assessment/Recommendation (SBAR)format, write out a
report for each of your assigned patients to provide the respiratory therapists who are
coming on shift with the necessary patient information.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Corning, H., et al.. Mosby’s Respiratory Care PDQ. 2nd Edition. Mosby, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 04/02/2012

