BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 110 - Fundamentals of Respiratory Care
Prerequisite(s): Admission to the RT Program
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
102 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

7 Unit(s)

This course is designed to introduce the student to basic atmospheric physics, cardiopulmonary
anatomy and physiology, blood gas chemistry, and ventilatory dynamics. The student will be
introduced to basic concepts of health and disease with emphasis on cardiopulmonary disorders,
fundamentals of problem solving techniques and safe handling of medical gases and equipment.
Selected respiratory care and diagnostic equipment, techniques and problems will be introduced in the
laboratory. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the composition and behavior of the atmosphere as it relates to the physiology of human
respiration.
B. Identify the structures and functions of the human cardiopulmonary system.
C. Demonstrate skills in basic clinical therapeutic and diagnostic problem solving.
D. Demonstrate the proper use of medical equipment and devices routinely used in the diagnosis
and care of patients with cardiopulmonary disease.
E. Identify the major concepts related to growth and development of the cardiopulmonary system
from conception through old age.
F. Identify the basic signs and symptoms of cardiopulmonary disease.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Atmospheric Physics
2. Anatomy of the Respiratory System
3. Ventilation
4. Diffusion of Pulmonary Gases
5. Pulmonary Function Measurement
6. Circulatory System
7. O2 Transport and Acid-Base Balance
8. Ventilation-Perfusion Relationships
9. Control of Ventilation
10. Cardiopulmonary Physiology of the Fetusand Newborn
11. Renal Failure and its Effects on the Cardiopulmonary System
12. Aging and its Effects on the Cardiopulmonary System
Total Hours

Hours
12.00
16.00
6.00
6.00
12.00
10.00
10.00
4.00
6.00
10.00
4.00
6.00
102.00

Lab
Topics
1. Asepsis and Decontamination
2. Medical Gases and Oxygen Supply Systems
3. Medical Gas Analysis
4. Medical Gas Therapy and Delivery Devices
5. Spirometry and Pulmonary Function Measurement
6. Humidity Therapy
7. Aerosol Therapy
8. Environmental Therapy
9. Incentive Spirometry
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
9.00
3.00
9.00
6.00
3.00
12.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Group Discussions
D. Guest Speakers
E. Collaborative Group Work
F. Class Activities
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Laboratory Experiments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Lab Projects
F. Written Assignments
G. Written Examinations
H. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the assigned, required readings for Atmospheric Physics. Be prepared to discuss and
solve Gas Law problems.
2. Read the assigned, required reading for Anatomy of the Respiratory System. Be prepared
to contribute to classroom discussion on the topic.
B. Writing Assignments
1. After completing the assigned reading and classroom presentations on Anatomy of the
Respiratory System, answer each item listed under the Anatomy of the Respiratory
System Learning Objectives.
2. After completing the assigned reading and classroom presentations on Atmospheric
Physics, answer each item listed under the Atmospherics Physics Learning Objectives.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Review the handouts on the Alveolar Air equation, Oxygen Content equation, V02, and
D02 and solve the assigned problems for each equation.

D02 and solve the assigned problems for each equation.
2. Review the handouts on the 4 Gas Laws discussed in class and solve the assigned Gas
Law problems.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Cairo, J.M., . Pilbeam, S. Mosby’s Respiratory Care Equipment. 8th Edition. Mosby, 2010.
B. Des Jardins, T. Cardiopulmonary Anatomy & Physiology: The Essentials for Respiratory Care.
6th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2012.
C. Scanlan CL, Spearman CB, Sheldon, RL. Sheldon, RL. Egan’s Fundamentals of Respiratory
Care . 10th Edition. Mosby, 2012.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. American Association for Respiratory Care, Clinical Practice Guidelines, current editions on
Web
B. Selected references from medical periodicals

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 12/02/2013

