BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RT 160 - Respiratory Care Seminar II
Prerequisite(s): RT 155
Co-requisite(s): RT 165
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is designed to explore the historical, contemporary and technical issues germaine to
respiratory care as an allied health profession through lecture/discussion/literary review. Emphasis
will be placed on issues relevant to the current practice of respiratory care and current credentialing
requirements. Preparation for post-graduate credentialing examinations will be included in course
work. Graded only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Score a minimum of 70% on a National Board of Respiratory Care (NBRC) Entry-Level Exam
(ELE) prior to graduation.
B. Demonstrate the skills necessary to successfully complete an Advanced Cardiac Life Support
training.
C. Apply the knowledge gained on advanced respiratory care topics to clinical scenarios.
D. Demonstrate knowledge of the contempory issues of respiratory care.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Understanding the National Board of Respiratory Care (NBRC) testing
process
2. Entry-Level-Exam (ELE) examination
3. Written Registery Examination (WRE)
4. Clinical Simulation Exam (CSE)
5. Preparing for employment
6. ACLS preparation
7. High frequency ventilation
8. Home care equipment and procedures
9. Hemodynamic equipment and interpretation
10. Nicotine addiction and intervention
11. Equipment sterilization and surveillance methods
12. Quality control/Quality improvement
13. End-of-Life care
14. Disaster management
15. Sub-acute SNF/Rehabilitation respiratory care
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
6.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
8.00
8.00
4.00
8.00
3.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Final Examination
E. Written Assignments
F. Written Examinations
G. Class Discussion
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Complete the assigned readings for Smoking Cessation/Nicotine Replacement, and be
prepared to participate in a classroom discussion on this topic.
2. Complete the assigned readings for Hemodynamic Monitoring Set Up and Interpretation,
and be prepared to participate in a classroom discussion on this topic.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a professional resume, focusing on obtaining a job in respiratory care, using the
guidelines provided in lecture.
2. Using the feedback provided by the instructor, revise your professional resume and
resubmit it to your instructor.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Answer the end of the chapter review questions from the Respiratory Exam Review
textbook for Chapter 5.
2. Answer the end of the chapter review questions from the Respiratory Exam Review
textbook for Chapters 1 and 2.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Persing, Gary. Respiratory Care Exam Review. 3rd Edition. Saunders, 2010.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Computerized ELE, WRE, and CSE examinations

Created/Revised by: Donna Davis
Date: 04/02/2012

