BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RTVF 55 - Music Video Production
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III; Math Level I
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the process of producing video and audio recordings of live musical
performances. Students will work as the television studio crew recording live musical performances
and will learn basic techniques including lighting, sound recording, video directing, camera
operations, and production planning.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Analyze and plan a music video production based on staging design, power requirements, audio
characteristics, and lighting demands.
B. Set up and operate a video camera as part of a music production crew.
C. Operate a video switcher as part of a video production under the supervision of the director.
D. Operate the graphics generator under the supervision of the director during a music video
production.
E. Set up and operate the audio support system during a music video production.
F. Supervise and communicate with a video crew during a music video production.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to music video production
2. Studio set design for a live music performance video recording
3. Setup and operation of the handheld and tripod video camera
4. Setup and operation of the audio mixer and microphones
5. Setup and design of lighting for video production
6. Technical Directing: switcher operations
7. Video Directing: communicating with cast and crew
8. Staging for music video production
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.00
34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Setup and operation of the TV studio
2. Setup and operation of the handheld and tripod video camera
3. Setup and operation of the audio mixer and microphones
4. Setup and design of lighting for the video production
5. Technical Directing: switcher operations

Hours
7.00
8.00
8.00
7.00
7.00

5. Technical Directing: switcher operations
6. Video Directing: communicating with cast and crew
7. Staging for music video production
Total Hours

7.00
7.00
7.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Demonstrations
H. Problem-Solving Sessions
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Projects
B. Homework
C. Written Assignments
D. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter in the class text about studio camera operations with a focus on the three
basic types of camera shots in terms of distance to the subject. Complete the study guide
questions and be prepared to demonstrate the basic camera shots and other camera
operations in class.
2. Read the chapter in the class text about communications between director and crew.
Complete the study guide quiz and be prepared to demonstrate at least five basic intercom
verbal commands a director would give a video production crew to accomplish specific
tasks during a live performance recording.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Review a selected list of live musical performance video recordings. In 2-3 pages analyze
them in terms of how well they used techniques such as lighting, audio, videography,
computer graphics, set design, and staging to enhance the presentation.
2. Read the chapter in the textbook on preparing a program proposal to attract funding
support from potential advertisers or underwriters. Write a 2-3 page program proposal for
a potential financial backer detailing the scope of the production including such items as
program length, feature performers, technical requirements, location issues, staffing
needs, target audience.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Use an online job search database such as entertainmentcareers.net to identify audio/video
production career opportunities in California and the United States. Describe at least three
potential jobs in terms of location, job tasks, salary and experience required.
2. Prepare a 3-5 page production plan for a studio recording of a live musical performance.
Be sure to include specific details about such items as lighting and audio set-ups, crew
assignments, performance sequences, computer graphics requirements, legal
releases/permissions, live feed arrangements and artist relations.

VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Zettl, H. Television Production Handbook. 11 Edition. Cengage Learning, 2011.

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 11/19/2012

