BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RTVF 12 - Mass Media and Society
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

Survey of mass communication and the interrelationships of media with society including history,
structure and trends in a digital age. Discussion of theories and effects, economics, technology, law
and ethics, global media, media literacy, and social issues, including gender and cultural diversity.
(C-ID JOUR 100).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Evaluate the role, power and influence of the mass media.
B. Analyze the influence and role of technology in affecting mass media content and the impact it
has on society.
C. Demonstrate critical thinking skills to analyze media’s influence.
D. Identify the major mass media.
E. Describe the development/history of the mass media in the United States.
F. Describe roles of the mass media in society and society’s relationship with the media.
G. Define the five freedoms of the first amendment.
H. Demonstrate a general understanding of legal responsibilities of the mass.
I. Evaluate global media trends.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Mass media structures
2. History of individual media
3. Media issues, economics and trends
4. Societal and cultural relationships with the media
5. Media literacy
6. Media effects
7. Legal issues involving media
8. Global media
Total Hours

Hours
6.50
6.50
6.50
6.50
6.50
6.50
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each

hour of lecture
F. Discussion
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Oral Presentation
D. Projects
E. Homework
F. Essays and research papers
G. The course includes a minimum 1500 word writing requirement. The writing requirement may
be fulfilled by any combination of essay or paragraph-length exam questions, formal essays or
research papers, and/or in-class or out-of-class writing activities.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on media gender bias and write a 2-3 page analysis of how three
different magazine advertisements present male and female images to encourage reader
identification with the product.
2. Choose one sports broadcast and one daytime drama from the list of TV shows supplied
by the instructor. Then write a 2-3 page comparison of the program content, target
demographics and advertising strategies found in each program.
B. Writing Assignments
1. View selected TV programs and commercials and then describe the relationship between
program content, target demographics and advertising strategies.
2. Review and critique existing sociological literature related to mass media and society.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Using the guide on recognizing media stereotyping, gather and compare how at least three
magazine advertisements present minorities to satisfy the desires of the majority beliefs in
the target audience.
2. Using the "Propaganda Model" as a guide, view the 1943 WW II Disney Propaganda
cartoon "Hitler's Children.” In 2-3 pages, describe at least two examples from the cartoon
that demonstrates how the film contrasts Hitler and the Nazis to American ideals and
beliefs.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Gorham, Joan. Mass Media 12/13. 18 Edition. McGraw-Hill/Dushkin, 2012.
B. Curran, J.B.. Mass Media and Society. 5th Edition. Bloomsbury, 2011.
C. Baran, S. Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and Culture. 8th Edition.
McGraw-Hill, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 11/17/2014

