BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RTVF 40 - Digital Video Production
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture
51 hours Lab

3 Unit(s)

The course provides an introduction to the theory, terminology, and operation of single camera video
production, including composition and editing techniques, camera operation, portable lighting, video
recorder operation, audio control and basic editing. This course focuses on the aesthetics and
fundamentals of scripting, producing, directing on location, postproduction, and
exhibition/distribution.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate both the technical and aesthetic aspects of video field production and demonstrate
knowledge of basic production techniques.
B. Operate video field recording equipment correctly to acquire quality video and audio products.
C. Conceive and execute appropriate approaches to editing field footage into cohesive projects.
D. Demonstrate the skills needed for successful teamwork in television, film or other media
employment.
E. Demonstrate through projects that with the power of a communicator, comes moral and ethical
responsibility.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. An overview of the process of pre-production, production and
post-production camera operation including recording formats, lens
operation, basic filters and tripod use
2. Picture composition
3. Basic lighting techniques and equipment
4. Basic audio including different microphones and mounting techniques, and
appropriate sound theory (i.e. balance, presence and perspective)
5. General concepts of acting and directing
6. Post-production theory (i.e. continuity and dynamic editing) plus basic
operation for nonlinear editing including ingest, editing operation and
distribution
Total Hours

Hours
6.00

6.00
5.00
6.00
5.00
6.00

34.00

Lab
Topics
1. Produce recordings using various lenses and filters

Hours
8.00

1.
2.
3.
4.

Produce recordings using various lenses and filters
Produce projects using multiple picture compositions
Use basic lighting techniques and equipment
Record projects using different microphones and mounting techniques (i.e.
balance, presence and perspective)
5. Create projects that incorporate acting and directing
6. Use post-production to create nonlinear editing projects
7. Assemble as a final individual project a live action (or dramatic creation)
suitable for review and evaluation during a public showing
Total Hours

8.00
7.00
7.00
8.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Demonstrations
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. Individual and Group Projects
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Projects
C. Homework
D. Final Examination
E. Written Assignments
F. Written Examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on basic videography; complete the reading assessment quiz and be
prepared to apply the chapter information during the videography shooting assignment.
2. Read the chapter on non-linear video editing and write a 200 word minimum summary of
the chapter information for a class discussion of video editing.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 200 word minimum analysis of how the “Rule of Thirds” is used in a video
production to improve composition and direct viewer interest. Be prepared to present your
findings during a class discussion of effective video composition.
2. View a student video project and write 250 word minimum analysis of its content and
presentation in terms of accepted principles of videography and editing.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Plan and design a storyboard for a video production including details of camera placement,
character dialog, camera moves, and composition.
2. Use an online job search database to identify opportunities for videographers/editors in
California and the United States. Write a 200 word minimum report on your findings.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Zettl, H. TV Production Handbook. Wadsworth Publishing, 2011.

A. Zettl, H. TV Production Handbook. Wadsworth Publishing, 2011.
B. Musberger, R. Single Camera Video Production. 5th Edition. Focal Press, 2010.
C. Compesi, R. Video Field Production and Editing. 7th Edition. Focal Press, 2006.

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 10/19/2015

