BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
RTVF 14 - Introduction to Media Writing
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

Basic introductory course in writing for the film and electronic media. Emphasis on preparing scripts
in proper formats, including fundamental technical, conceptual and stylistic issues related to writing
fiction and non-fiction scripts for informational and entertainment purposes in film and electronic
media. Includes a writing evaluation component as a significant part of the course requirement.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate competence in the mechanics of clear and concise writing.
B. Demonstrate an understanding of the technical and aesthetic issues related to writing for the film
and electronic media.
C. Demonstrate an understanding of the fundamental principles of narrative fiction screenwriting.
D. Demonstrate proficiency in writing in a variety of script formats, including the radio script,
two-column video script, film script and sitcom script formats.
E. Demonstrate proficiency in creating a complete, short fictional narrative and writing it as a
20-30-page film script.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Writing regardless of medium or format – clarity, economy, grammar, style
2. Issues specific to writing for radio (writing for the ear), film and television
(writing for the eye), multimedia (writing for the ear, the eye, and
interactivity)
3. Script formats – including, but not limited to radio, two-column video, film,
sitcom
4. Introduction to content for the various media – e.g., commercials, PSAs,
corporate productions, documentaries, web sites, fictional narratives (film,
half-hour TV comedy, one-hour TV drama)
5. Fundamentals of dramatic structure, including conflict
6. Fundamentals of character creation
7. Fundamentals of dialogue writing
8. Process and methodology of script writing (including outlines, treatments,
etc.)
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
7.00

6.00
8.00

6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Written Assignments
D. Oral critiques by peers and instructor
E. Written critiques by instructor
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the textbook chapter on writing for radio/TV news and come to class prepared to
discuss the differences between writing for radio and TV.
2. Read the instructor supplied film script and TV script and come to class prepared to
discuss how the formats are different.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 30 second radio commercial based on product details supplied by the instructor.
Be prepared to read your script to the class.
2. Using the handout on film script writing supplied by the instructor, write a 500 word
story concept. Be prepared to present your story concept in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Read and analyze one film script from the instructor supplied list and come to class
prepared to discuss how it reflects the three-act structure discussed in script writing
chapter in the class text.
2. Listen to six radio commercials and come to class prepared to discuss the differences
between features and benefits for the advertised products.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hilliard, Robert L. Writing for Television, Radio, and New Media (Broadcast and Production).
11th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2014.
B. Trottier, David. Screenwriter's Bible. 6th Edition. Stilman-James, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Mark Hall
Date: 10/19/2015

