BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SIGN 1 - American Sign Language 1
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level II; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a beginner's study of the fundamental principles, structure, and receptive and expressive
vocabulary of American Sign Language (ASL). This course incorporates the skill of Fingerspelling as
an essential part of ASL. lt focuses on the acquisition of ASL and provides opportunities for learning
the idiomatic Language of Deaf Americans. Study of the culture and history of the American Deaf
community will be infused throughout the curriculum.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate both receptive and expressive nonverbal communication technique of
Fingerspelling using the ASL Manual Alphabet.
B. Demonstrate grammar, structure and vocabulary of ASL at an introductory level.
C. Demonstrate a basic knowledge of the various manual communication systems used in America.
D. Demonstrate a basic understanding of the history and culture of the American Deaf community.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussions of the Deaf culture and community will be woven throughout the course.
Lecture
Topics
1. ASL Manual Alphabet, Fingerspelling, Sign Language Continuum
2. Fingerspelling Video, learning techniques and Practice
3. ASL Pronouns, Cardinal Numbers, Hearing Loss
4. ASL Strategies, one and two handed Signs, ASL grammar
5. Self lntroductions, Colors, Noun/Verb Agreements
6. The Deaf Community, ASL Sentence Types
7. Introduction to Deaf history and Culture, ASL Question Types
8. Deaf Cultural Etiquette, Exchanging Personal Information in ASL
9. Cultural Review of "Through Deaf Eyes"
10. Gallaudet University, ASL historical development, Personal Descriptions
11. Commands, Ordinal Numbers, Spatial Agreement
12. Time, Compound Signs, Loan Signs, Family Signs
13. Person Designation, Sequencing Activities, Deaf Folklore
14. 1ntroduction to Pidgin Signed English, Manually Coded English
15. Storytelling, Contributions to Society by the Deaf Community
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
B. Discussion
C. Multimedia Presentations
D. Lecture (ASL,Spoken English, Overhead Text, Visuals)
E. Textbook Exercises
F. Signing partners and group study sessions opportunities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Homework
C. Class participation
D. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the Article, "The Deaf Community and the Culture of Deaf People" by Carol Padden
from this week's handout. Write a two page informal essay in which you identify and
comment on specific cultural markers and you discuss the main ideas of the article.
2. Read the article on Regina Olson Hughes in your textbook. Outline the main points of
Hughes' article. Be prepared to discuss the article in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a one page response to the lesson on Deaf Cultural Etiquette. Evaluate and discuss
how Deaf Cultural Etiquette is reflected in the previous articles we have read and how it
differs from your own cultural etiquette.
2. Complete the textbook homework exercises on ordinal numbers and spatial agreement
with your Signing partner. Write a one page description of the challenges you found in this
communication.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Prepare a signed presentation incorporating vocabulary and grammar from each unit.
2. Watch ASL Conversations 1 and 2 from the Unit 2 DVD. Review the vocabulary. Practice
the new signs presented.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Costello, Elaine. Concise American Sign Language Dictionary. Random House Websters, 2002.
B. Smith, Lentz, and Mikos. Signing Naturally. Student Workbook. Units 1-6. Dawn Sign Press,
2008.
C. Groode, Joyce. Fingerspelling, Expressive and Receptive Fluency. A Video Guide . Dawn
Pictures, Dawn Sign Press, 1992.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Through Deaf Eyes. DVD, produced by WETA, Washington D.C. in association with Gallaudet
University, Distributed by PBS Home Video, 2007.

Created/Revised by: Suzanne Gripenstraw
Date: 03/04/2013

