BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SIGN 2 - American Sign Language II
Prerequisite(s): ASL 1
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

SIGN 2 is a more advanced study of the fundamental principles, structure, and vocabulary of
American Sign Language (ASL). It incorporates an in-depth study of fingerspelling, numbers, English
idioms, classifiers, and the various Sign Language Systems. The course includes an introduction to the
interpreting process. Study of the culture and history of the American Deaf community will be infused
throughout the curriculum.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Employ ASL Fingerspelling techniques and number signs to communicate daily conversations.
B. Utilize ASL for in-depth conversations using ASL grammar and classifiers and to communicate
complex narratives.
C. Discuss and demonstrate an understanding of the complexity of interpreting English idiomatic
expressions into ASL using the literal meaning of those idiomatic expressions.
D. Analyze and discuss the Culture and History of Deaf Americans and other Sign Systems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussions of the Deaf culture and community will be woven throughout the course.
Lecture
Topics
1. Skills Assessment Test, Study of ASL Numbers
2. Giving Directions in ASL, Cont. the Study of Number
3. Advanced Fingerspelling Techniques
4. ASL Descriptions of People
5. ASL Classifiers and how they are used
6. Making Requests, Sign Systems - Pidgen Signed English (PSE) vs Signing
Exact English (SEE)
7. ASL Verb Types, Adverbs, and Sentence Structure
8. Family Signs and Occupations
9. Cultural review of the movie, "Children of a Lesser God"
10. ASL Attributing Personal Qualities and Characteristics
11. English Idioms and Expressions/ASL Meanings
12. Personal Daily Routines, more English Idioms
13. Introduction to the English/ASL Interpreting Process
14. Continuation of the Interpreter Process, and Practice
15. Storytelling, Narratives and Interpreting Practice
16. History and Culture of Deaf Americans, Deaf Simulation

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00

16. History and Culture of Deaf Americans, Deaf Simulation
Total Hours

6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Guest Speakers
B. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
C. Discussion
D. Multimedia Presentations
E. Lecture (ASL, Spoken English, Text, Visuals)
F. Signing partners and group study sessions opportunities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Papers
C. Demonstration
D. Homework
E. Written Assignments
F. Practical Evaluations
G. Mid-term and final examinations
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Review the list of English Idioms from this week's handout.Be prepared to discuss the
idioms and their role in language in class.
2. After reading a journal article relating to Deaf culture and Deaf issues, write a one page
summary specifically identifying the main ideas presented. Write a conclusion to discuss
what you learned.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Complete the textbook homework exercises on personal qualities and characteristics with
your signing partner. Write a page describing the challenges you found in this
communication.
2. Write a two page compare/contrast paper examining English and ASL idioms.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Go to www.aslpro.com. Watch the signing exercise, practice the signs, and complete the
online quiz.
2. Attend a Deaf cultural event and write a description detailing your observations.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Smith, Lentz, and Mikos. Signing Naturally. Student Workbook, Units 7-12. Dawn Sign Press,
1993.
B. Costello, Elaine. Random House Webster's American Sign Language Dictionary. 2008 Edition.
Random House Websters, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Children of a Lesser God, produced by Paramount Pictures 1986.
B. Number Signs for Everyone, DVD by Cinnie MacDougall, Dawn Sign Press, 1997.

Created/Revised by: Suzanne Gripenstraw

Created/Revised by: Suzanne Gripenstraw
Date: 03/04/2013

