BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 4 - Modern Social Problems
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

An identification and analysis of contemporary social problems including (1) the role of power and
ideology in the definition of social problems, (2) their causes and consequences, (3) evaluations of
proposed solutions, and (4) methods of intervention. Topics will vary. (C-ID SOCI 115).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate understanding of major social problems concerning the U.S.
B. Place local, regional and national social problems in global context.
C. Identify and distinguish between causes and consequences of social problems.
D. Analyze social problems using sociological approaches and concepts.
E. Analyze and interpret both quantitative and qualitative information about social problems.
F. Identify and evaluate policies that address social problems and assess the policies' impact on
society.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The social construction and consequences of social problems
2. The role of power and ideology in the definition of social problems
3. The causes of social problems
4. Evaluation and consideration of proposed solutions to social problems
5. Consideration of methods of research and analysis
6. Additional topics may vary
Total Hours

Hours
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
8.50
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Class Activities
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects

B. Research Projects
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Class participation
F. Mid-term and final examinations
G. On written assignments, students will be required to produce a minimum of 1,500 words.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout on the Ecological Footprint of the war in Iraq. Compare and contrast the
social and human cost of life with previous warfare engagements. Be prepared to discuss
these events and the cost of warfare.
2. Read the handout, Robert Merton's "Saints and Roughnecks". Utilizing Merton's typology
found within your text book, compare and contrast the relative deviance of each group of
juveniles. Be prepared to discuss the social, political and economic differences between
the groups.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a 3-5 page paper outlining the influence that the World Trade Organization has had
on various voting issues. Detail the effect this has had politically, economically and
socially upon sovereignty within various countries. Cite appropriate references at the end
of your paper and give examples of each perspective.
2. Write a 5 page essay detailing the top 5 social problems you believe we will have to face
this decade. Compare and contrast your choices with the previous decade. Include how
and why you chose those 5 social problems and defend your choices. Cite relevant
references at the end of your paper.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Keep track of all the food you eat for a week. Provide an analysis of where your food
comes from in the context of centralized vs. localized food systems. Discuss the pros and
cons of both systems.
2. Interview two people born before 1940 and two people born after 1980. Ask each to
discuss their own first time experiences of voting in national elections. In what ways, if
any, do their views on participatory democracy differ and in what ways are they similar?
How do each view the efficacy and the future of participatory democracy in the United
States?
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Eitzen, Baca-Zinn. Social Problems. 13th Edition. Allyn and Bacon, 2013.
B. Robbins, R. Global Problems and the Culture of Capitalism. 5th Edition. Allyn and Bacon,
2010.
C. Henslin, James. Social Problems: A Down to Earth Approach. 11 Edition. Prentice Hall, 2013.
D. Leon-Guerrero, Anna. Social Problems: Community, Policy, and Social Action. 4 Edition. Sage
Publications, 2013.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Handouts and library assignments as appropriate.

Created/Revised by: Melinda Riley
Date: 05/04/2015

