BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 2 - Principles of Sociology
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course introduces students to the sociological perspective. Students will gain an understanding of
the external social forces that guide human action and how the wider society influences individual and
collective experiences. The course will cover the basic concepts, theoretical approaches, and research
methods of sociology. Topics may include the analysis and explanation of social structure, group
dynamics, socialization and the self, social stratification, culture and diversity, social change, human
impact on the environment, and global dynamics. (C-ID SOCI 110).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe the sociological imagination and interpret and assess its function in the study of
societies.
B. Outline and critically annotate the historical development of sociology as a separate discipline.
C. Distinguish and critically evaluate sociological research methods.
D. Define, explain, and contrast the major sociological theoretical perspectives and identify their
historical and analytic limitations.
E. Interpret, analyze, and apply sociological concepts to everyday life.
F. Describe the process of socialization throughout the life course.
G. Describe and explain the basic dimensions and consequences of social inequality relative to
issues of race, ethnicity, class, gender, age, and sexual orientation.
H. Recognize and assess the influence that social institutions and culture have on shaping
individual and collective values, norms, behaviors, roles, identities, expectations, and
knowledge structures.
I. Identify and discuss solutions to the impacts that human societies have on natural ecosystems.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. The Sociological Imagination
2. Major Theoretical Perspectives in Sociology
3. Historical Development of Sociology
4. Sociological Research Methods
5. Sociology of Culture
6. Socialization and the Self
7. Crime, Deviance, and Social Control
8. Social Institutions: The Family, Education, Government, Religion, the
Media, and the Economy
9. Social Stratification and Class Inequality
10. The Sociology of Gender and Sexual Orientation

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
9.00
3.00
3.00

11. Race and Ethnicity
12. Global Issues: Population, Urbanization, and Development
13. Social Impacts on the Natural Environment
14. Social Movements and Social Change
Total Hours

6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Class participation
F. Written assignments: Each student will be required to write at least 1500 words.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read William Rees' article "Is Humanity Fatally Successful" and critically evaluate the
differences between the biological and the cultural causes of planetary resource depletion
by human societies and come prepared for discussion in class.
2. Read C. Wright Mills "The Sociological Imagination" and explain the distinction he
makes between "Private Troubles" and "Public Issues" and be prepared to explain the
distinction in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze and write about the differences between 'discrimination' and 'prejudice' and how
each manifests in society.
2. Distinguish and write about the differences between 'symbolic' and 'material' culture in the
context of the evolution of knowledge and technology in human civilization.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Conduct an Ecological Footprint Analysis of your household. Analyze your findings in a
way that will allow members of your household to scale back their footprint. What types
of behavioral and lifestyle changes can you and members of your household make to
reduce your overall footprint, and what impact will those changes have on your
consumption habits.
2. Interview 8 of your closest friends about their expectations for the U.S. economy in the
coming 10 years. Record their critiques of the economy and their thoughts about their own
future economic prospects in terms of finding gainful employment and achieving an
acceptable overall standard of living.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Henslin, James. Essentials of Sociology: A Down to Earth Approach. 11 Edition. Pearson

Publishers, 2014.
B. Macionis, John. Society: The Basics. 13 Edition. Prentice Hall, 2014.
C. Giddens, Anthony et. al. Introduction to Sociology. 9 Edition. W.W. Norton, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Melinda Riley
Date: 05/04/2015

