BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 8 - Introduction to Marriage, Family and Intimate Relationships
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a sociological analysis of contemporary issues in family life, including historical and
recent changes and the socio-cultural and economic forces shaping these changes. Cross-cultural
analysis will also be considered. (C-ID SOCI 130).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify and describe the historical, cultural and political contexts of family life and structure.
B. Identify and describe the major sociological theories of the family in the United States.
C. Describe the family as a system of relations shaped by socialization, culture, social class,
gender, race and ethnicity, age, sexuality and sexual preference, immigration status, and social
norms.
D. Describe how intimate relationships include alternative and diverse definitions.
E. Explain the basic dimensions of social inequality and social change as it relates to family life.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Historical, Economic and Political Context of the Family
2. Theoretical Perspectives of Family Structures in Sociology
3. Methodological Approaches to Marriage and Family Studies
4. The Traditional Family and Changing Family Forms
5. Cultural Diversity and Varieties of Family Structures and Norms
6. Dating, Mate Selection, and Gender Roles in the Family
7. Single-Hood, Marriage, and other Forms of Family Structures
8. Communication and Sexuality Patterns
9. Parenthood, Childrearing, and Socialization
10. Families and the Economy: Work and Consumerism
11. Family Crises and Change
12. Separation, Divorce, and Co-Parenting
13. Families and the Life Course: Aging and Family Structure
14. Socio-Cultural Influences on Family Life: Class, Status, Race, Ethnicity,
Gender, Sexual Orientation, Immigration Status, and Age
15. Social Policy and the Future of Family Life
16. The Global Perspective: Cross-Cultural Analyses of Family Life and
Family Policies
Total Hours

Hours
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Research Projects
D. Projects
E. Journal
F. Class participation
G. Written Assignments
H. Essays and research papers
I. On written assignments, students will be required to produce a minimum of 1,500 words for
credit in the course. This work must be typewritten and will be evaluated on content, clarity of
thought, analysis, grammar, spelling and syntax.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the handout titled 'No Baby on Board.” Compare and contrast why some couples
choose not to have children, while others do. Be prepared to discuss the various reasonings
for both groups
2. Read the chapter on cohabitation. Compare and contrast the various issues related to
cohabitation versus the historical concept of courtship leading to marriage. Be prepared to
discuss in depth in class discussion.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a biography of yourself including family history and cultural background. Identify
family members by including race, gender, ethnicity and social class for each member. If
you are without immediate family members, write about your 'fictive kin' including the
information above, along with who they represent and why.
2. Choose and describe in detail 10 virtues you wish your future partner to possess. Detail
what these virtues represent to you, why you have chosen those virtues and defend your
choices. If you are already married or in a committed relationship still choose 10 virtues.
Then compare and contrast your ideal with the reality of your current relationship.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch the movie "It's Complicated.” Critique the following issues as they relate to the
movie: infidelity, children of divorce, mature couples dating issues, emotional and
psychological ramifications with divorce and healthy mature relationships. Be prepared to
discuss them in detail in class.
2. Conduct a cross-cultural research on family norms and values from 3 different countries.
Present a research paper detailing the various influences culture, tradition, custom and
socialization represent in teaching the families norms and values to subsequent
generations.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION

Textbooks:
A. Baca Zinn, Maxine. Diversity in Families. 10th Edition. Pearson, 2014.
B. Strong, DeVault, and Cohen. The Marriage and Family Experience: Intimate Relationships in a
Changing Society . 12th Edition. Cengage Learning, 2013.
C. Olson, DeFrain, and Skogrand. Marriages and Families: Intimacy, Diversity and Strengths. 8th
Edition. McGraw Hill Humanities, 2013.

Created/Revised by: Melinda Riley
Date: 05/04/2015

