BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 20 - Introduction to Race and Ethnicity
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a sociological analysis of race, ethnicity, prejudice and discrimination. It examines the
cultural, political and economic practices and institutions that support or challenge racial and ethnic
inequalities, as well as patterns of interaction between various racial and ethnic groups. (C-ID SOCI
150).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify the cultural, political, economic, historical and institutional factors affecting the social
construction of race and ethnic relations.
B. Differentiate concepts such as prejudice, discrimination, segregation, assimilation and pluralism.
C. Analyze the cultural and institutional factors involved in race and ethnic relations, relating the
macro-level to the micro-level.
D. Compare and contrast the experiences of groups that have been historically marginalized,
particularly groups defined by ethnicity and race.
E. Analyze intersections of race and ethnicity with gender, class and other locations of identity.
F. Identify and analyze patterns of racial and ethnic interaction.
G. Identify, compare and contrast the experiences of major racial and ethnic groups.
H. Examine the majority-minority group relations including issues such as power and privilege.
I. Recognize and analyze instances of environmental discrimination, that is wwhere environmental
impacts disproportionately affect minority racial and ethnic populations.
J. Evaluate debates on current socio-political racial and ethnic issues such as affirmative action,
immigration policies, criminal justice policies, environmental discrimination and the future of
race and ethnic relations.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Historical Overview: Definitions of Race, Ethnicity, Prejudice and
Discrimination
2. Theories of Race and Ethnicity: Biology and Socio-Cultural Construction
3. Evaluating Perspectives on Power Relations in the Collection and Analysis
of Research Data
4. Patterns of Racial and Ethnic Interaction including Scapegoating,
Immigration, Colonialism, Assimilation, Integration and Pluralism
5. Institutional Discrimination
6. Racial and Ethnic Profiling and Color Blind Discrimination
7. Socioeconomic Inequality and the Intersection of Race, Ethnicity, Class,
Gender and Sexuality
8. Immigration and Racial/Ethnic Politics

Hours
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
3.00

8. Immigration and Racial/Ethnic Politics
9. Environmental Discrimination and the Impacts of Climate Change on
Racial and Ethnic Minorities
10. Global Inequality, Racial and Ethnic Violence and Genocide
11. Race and Ethnic Identity, Politics and Social Movements in the United
States and Beyond
12. The Future of Race and Ethnic Relations
Total Hours

3.00
3.00
3.00
9.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work
E. Class Activities
F. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
G. Reading Assignments
H. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Research Projects
C. Projects
D. Journal
E. Class participation
F. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an excerpt from the book "Malign Neglect" and discuss the racial differences in
sentencing for drug crimes.
2. Read "Principles of Stratification" by Davis and Moore and identify 3 weaknesses in their
argument.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research the differences between the concepts 'prejudice' and 'discrimination'. In a short
essay purpose solutions to both social phenomena.
2. Explain what 'environmental discrimination' is, providing at least two examples within an
essay. Be prepared to discuss your examples in class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview family members about their ethnic heritage. Ask them to discuss what types of
values they learned through that heritage. Then compare and contrast those values to your
own.
2. Conduct an analysis of television images of race and ethnicity. What sorts of roles do
actors of minority racial and ethnic status typically play? Describe these roles and provide
an explanation of why such stereotypes exist in the media. Discuss the social
consequences of these media stereotypes.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:

A. Parrillo,Vincent N. Understanding Race and Ethnic Relations. 5th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2015.
B. Ore, Tracy. The Social Construction of Difference and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender and
Sexuality. 6th Edition. McGraw-Hill Humanities, 2013.
C. Kerbo, Harold. Social Stratification and Inequality. 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill Humanities, 2011.
D. Sernau, Scott R. Worlds Apart: Social Inequalities in a Global Economy. 2nd Edition. Pine
Forge Press, 2005.

Created/Revised by: Melinda Riley
Date: 05/04/2015

