BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 55 - Sustainability Studies Seminar
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Co-requisite(s): Completion of/or concurrent enrollment in a minimum of 3 courses
from Sustainability Studies Certificate Program.
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: CSU
34 hours Lecture

2 Unit(s)

Sustainability Studies is a capstone seminar that will provide a forum for Sustainability Studies
students to integrate and critically evaluate the various content of the courses within the Sustainability
Studies Certificate Program. Emphasis will be placed on evaluating the triple-bottom-line impacts of
economic, social and environmental practices and policies at local, regional and global levels. Graded
only.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Integrate the content of courses within the Sustainability Studies Certificate Program.
B. Discuss and write about the interconnected nature of Sustainability Studies course content.
C. Identify how current social, economic, and environmental problems effect their individual lives,
the lives of people in other parts of the world, and the lives of future generations.
D. Develop a knowledge base to enable them to choose lifestyles and careers that will promote
sustainable principles.
E. Work together as a group to identify and evalulate a situation within their own community that is
unsustainable and design and implement a group project that will make that practice more
sustainable.
F. Study and practice a variety of leadership styles and rate their efficacy in terms of educating
diverse populations about sustainability issues, and developing, launching, and bringing to
fruition sustainability initiative's.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Integrating Sustainability Issues in a Global Context
2. Integrating Sustainability Issues in a National Context
3. Integrating Sustainability Issues in a Regional/Local Context
4. Integrating Sustainability Principles in a Personal Context
5. Integrating Sustainability Issues and Community Action
Total Hours

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Field Experience/Internship
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Collaborative Group Work

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
10.00
34.00

E. Class Activities
F. Field Trips
G. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
H. Discussion
I. Problem-Solving Sessions
J. Multimedia Presentations
K. Students will be graded primarily on the depth and complexity of their journal assignments,
group discussion and final project reports
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Oral Presentation
B. Projects
C. Journal
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Macy, Joanna & Molly Young Brown. Coming Back to Life: Practices to Reconnect Our Lives,
Our World. 5th Edition. New Society Publishers, 2006.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Bioneers DVD series

Created/Revised by: Melinda Riley
Date: 12/01/2008

