BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 14 - Sociology of Gender
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a sociological analysis of the social construction of masculinity and femininity
historically and cross-culturally. It examines the debates on sex and gender. It analyzes the impact of
economic and political change on gender expectations and practices. It focuses on macro-analysis of
how institutions and culture shape gender and micro-analysis of how individuals are socialized and
how they "do" and practice gender. (C-ID SOCI 140).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Compare and contrast sociological perspectives used to interpret gender relations.
B. Differentiate between the terms 'sex' and 'gender' and discuss their differences within the larger
social context of gendered relations.
C. Identify the main agents of gender socialization and their impact on children's and adults'
gender construction.
D. Describe gender ideology and practices in multiple social institutions and across cultures and
societies.
E. Identify the interplay of race, ethnicity, class, age, and sexuality affecting gender relations.
F. Outline the process by which people negotiate power and gender boundaries through their
relationships with others (including violent relationships).
G. Identify social, political, and cultural movements to change gender inequalities and gender
practices.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the Sociology of Gender and the Issues of Women and Men
2. Major Theoretical Paradigms and Research Methods in Sociology
3. Biological, Psychological, and Socio-Cultural Construction of Sex and
Gender
4. Social Institutions and the Socialization Process in Gender Development
5. Gender, Language, Communication, and Social Interaction
6. Intimate Relations, Family Relations and the Lifespan
7. Gender and the Social Construction of Sexuality
8. Variations of Masculinity and Femininity
9. Economic, Racial, Ethnic, Migrant, Sexuality, Life-span, and
Cross-Cultural Variations of Gender
10. Gender interactions in Social Institutions (Media, Economy, Politics,
Religion, the Family, Education, Health Care, Sports)
11. Gender Politics: Women's Movements, Men's Movements, and Lesbian,

Hours
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
3.00

11. Gender Politics: Women's Movements, Men's Movements, and Lesbian,
Gay, Bi-Sexual, and Transgender Struggles
Total Hours

3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Research Projects
C. Homework
D. Class participation
E. Mid-term and final examinations
F. On written assignments, students will be required to produce a minimum of 1,500 words.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read the chapter on Masculinity and Men's Norms and Values. Compare and contrast the
various insecurities and vulnerabilities detailed in the chapter. Be prepared to discuss
personal issues as they relate to either yourself or a family member.
2. Read the chapter detailing the social impact of class on race and ethnicity. Detail the
differences between Latino, African American and White families and how we socialize
our children into their gender roles. Be prepared to discuss these perspectives in detail in
class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. In previous classes we have discussed how culture has influenced diversity and how
women's contributions have become more inclusive. In a written essay detail the various
contributions made by men and women in our society. Detail how the various matrilineal
and patrilineal cultural systems deal with male authority versus female power. Explain and
give examples.
2. Write an essay detailing the construction of an ideal family form and marital relationship
from a functional and conflict perspective. Include how marital success and happiness are
determined in this idealized construction. Give examples of all perspectives.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. A person’s mind matures through interaction with the environment. Watch the movie
"Nell.” Write a paper detailing the social development of Nell. Pay particular attention to
gender identity, cognitive development, issues of androgyny and symbolic interaction.
Give examples from the movie.
2. Obtain permission to observe children at play in a child development lab. Prepare a paper
discussing what they play with (toys), who they play with (same or opposite sex children),
how they handle conflicts and gendered interactions with adults. Relate this to information
from your text about gender socialization.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:

A. Durham, M. Gigi. The Lolita Effect. Overlook TP, 2009.
B. Katz, Jackson. The Macho Paradox. Sourcebooks, 2006.
C. Kimmel and Aronson. The Gendered Society Reader. 5th Edition. Oxford Press, 2013.
D. Lindsey, Linda L. Gender Roles: A Sociological Perspective. 6th Edition. Prentice Hall, 2014.

Created/Revised by: Melinda Riley
Date: 05/04/2015

