BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 10 - Introduction to Crime and Society
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a sociological analysis of crime, criminal behavior, and the criminal justice system. The
history and social construction of crime and criminality are examined. The definition of crime and its
violations as well as the laws and methods used to control criminal behavior are examined. The
measurement of crime and basic theoretical explanations of criminal behavior are included. (C-ID
SOCI 160).
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Define the major concepts in criminology.
B. Define the concept of social norms and explain why they exist in all cultures as a way to
maintain social control.
C. Compare and contrast the sociological theories used to explain crime and criminal behavior.
D. Describe examples that illustrate the major criminology theories.
E. Compare and contrast the principles, procedures, and methods used by sociologists in the
collection of crime-related data.
F. Analyze criminal patterns and trends.
G. Analyze society's means and methods of addressing criminal behavior.
H. Analyze crime rates and variations of criminality as they exist historically and cross-culturally
and propose explanations for these variations.
I. Examine the role of the police, courts, and corrections as a means to enforce, sanction, and
punish criminal acts.
J. Analyze the legal and criminal justice system as a social institution.
K. Define and identify the types of crime and the people who commit them.
L. Differentiate between actual crime and perceptions of crime.
M. Analyze how race, gender, sexual orientation, age and class affect arrest, charging, and
sentencing.
N. Assess various types of intervention and prevention programs developed to reduce criminal
behavior.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Major sociological theories of crime
2. Definition and social construction of crime
3. History of criminal law, policing, punishment and corrections
4. Types of crime
5. Crime data and social research on crime
6. Crime intervention and prevention
7. Criminal sentencing and incarceration

Hours
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.50

8. Race, ethnicity, gender, age, class, sexuality, and crime
9. Deviance and social control
10. Victims and Victimization
11. Violent and property crime
12. White-collar and organized crime
13. Crime and substance abuse
14. Police, law enforcement, and the court system
15. Competing perspectives on due process and criminal control models
16. Issues in crime and criminal justice system
17. Youth and crime
18. Women, gender, and crime including sexual offenses
19. Cross-cultural variation of crime
Total Hours

1.50
1.50
1.50
3.00
3.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Problem-Solving Sessions
G. Reading Assignments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Oral Presentation
C. Homework
D. Essays and research papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read about 'White-Collar' Crimes. Be prepared to discuss the various implications and
effects these crimes have on society in class.
2. Read about a real crime, either a personal crime or property crime. Then using the profile
matrix discussed in class prepare your own profile of the victim and perpetrator. Be
prepared to share your findings with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Research a specific crime, either personal or property. Research paper must include the
general profile about the specific crime, the victim and the perpetrator. Research paper
must be 5-7 pages including abridged bibliography and works cited.
2. Statistical Analysis plays an important role in fighting crime. Identify a crime issue and
develop an instrument to measure the crimes effect on policing, courts jails and prison. Be
prepared to present your findings to the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Contact a local police department about taking part in their 'ride along program'. After
participating, write an evaluation of your experiences.
2. Attend a court proceeding of your choice and present a written account of what you

witnessed.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Curran and Renzetti. Theories of Crime . 2nd Edition. Pearson, 2001.
B. Barkan,Steven E. . Criminology: A Sociological Understanding . 6th Edition. Prentice Hall ,
2014.

Created/Revised by: Melinda Riley
Date: 05/04/2015

