BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SOC 30 - Sociology of Inequality
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level IV
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an analysis of social stratification and its affect on minority/majority group relations in
American society. Emphasis will be on the examination of sociohistorical patterns of relationships
between racial and ethnic minority groups and the dominant majority. Additionally, an evaluation of
sexism, classism, institutional discrimination and environmental racism provides the student with a
broad perspective of national and global social inequality.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Describe and evaluate the major sociological concepts that relate to minority/majority relations,
including prejudice, discrimination, oppression, social distance, and institutional discrimination.
B. Describe the historical origins of minority group status.
C. Identify and explain the differences between race/ethnicity and sex/gender; explain how race and
gender are social constructions.
D. Define and analyze the conceptual meaning of cultural privilege.
E. Describe how socioeconomic status contributes to social distance among minority/majority
group members.
F. Examine and assess the current state of minority/majority relations in the United States and
illustrate the influence of power in constructing minority/majority relations within the United
States and internationally.
G. Apply critical thinking skills in written and oral communication.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to social inequality and minority/majority group relations,
including the history of minority/majority relations and basic sociological
concepts
2. Sociohistorical origins of minority group status, including an overview of
racial and ethnic groups
3. What it means to be a minority: The social construction of race and gender
4. Social inequality and power among minority/majority groups
5. Prejudice, discrimination, and cultural privilege
6. Socioeconomic inequality and the intersection of race, ethnicity, and gender
7. Institutional discrimination and environmental racism
8. Global inequality and minority/majority group relations
Total Hours

Hours
6.00

12.00
6.00
3.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Group Discussions
C. Guest Speakers
D. Class Activities
E. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Papers
D. Projects
E. Class participation
F. Written assignments (Each student will be required to write at least 1500 words for credit in the
course, this work will be evaluated on content and syntax).
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Kimmel, Michael S. & Ferber, Abby L. . Privilege: A Reader. 1st Edition. Westview Press,
2003.
B. Ore, Tracy. The Social Construction of Difference and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender, and
Sexuality. 4th Edition. McGraw-Hill Humanities, 2008.
C. Kerbo, Harold. Social Stratification and Inequality. 7th Edition. McGraw-Hill Humanities, 2008.
D. Sernau, Scott R.. World's Apart: Social Inequalities in a Global Economy. 2nd Edition. Pine
Forge Press, 2005.
E. Johnson, Allan. Privilege, Power, and Difference. 2nd Edition. McGraw-Hill Humanities, 2005.

Created/Revised by: Julie Withers
Date: 04/20/2009

