BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPAN 4 - Fourth Semester Spanish
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the second half of intermediate Spanish which further develops the skills of
understanding, speaking, reading, and writing within a culturally rich context. It is a review and
further study of structural elements. Reading selections from the Hispanic world will be included.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. comprehend the Spanish language more successfully in the following contexts: business
settings, quotidian community life, familiar settings (e.g., with family and friends)
B. speak Spanish with increased accuracy and fluidity. By increasing proficiency, the student will
improve skills of rhythm, intonation, and stress patterns while learning grammatical structures
which will help the student develop effective idiomatic speaking patterns
C. develop reading skills in Spanish with direct comprehension, i.e., without conscious translation
D. improve Spanish writing skills
E. compare and contrast elements of the cultures of Spanish-speaking regions
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Spanish-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Subjunctive in adjective clauses, subjunctive in indefinite expressions, por
vs. para, prepositional pronouns
2. Subjunctive in adverbial clauses, demonstratives, reciprocals, reflexives
3. Subjunctive in adverbial clauses, adverbs, comparison of adjectives and
adverbs, irregular comparatives, absolute superlative, exclamations
4. "If" clauses, verbs followed by a preposition, diminutives and augmentatives
5. Passive voice, substitutes for the passive, uses of the infinitive,
nominalization, conjunctions
6. Definite article, indefinite article, expressions with tener, haber, deber,
miscellaneous
Total Hours

Hours
9.00
10.00
11.00
12.00
13.00
13.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Spanish except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Class Discussion
E. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and be prepared to discuss the characters and main themes of a short story by Isabel
Allende selected by the instructor.
2. Read and be prepared to discuss the characters and main themes of the novel Marianela
by Benito Galdós.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay on the historical significance of the Inca civilization in the modern
Peruvian society.
2. Write 3-5 pages, developing the topic of a sustainable future in Latin America while
referencing several obstacles different countries face due to pollution, poverty, and
violence within an unsteady infrastructure.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Watch and report on a political/social topic as presented on the news (such as on
Univision or CNN en español).
2. Research a country of interest in the Spanish-speaking world, and plan a trip there to
present to the class. While describing your planned activities, include various facts related
to the country, environment, and culture in that particular area.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Nichols, Johnson, Lemley, Osa-Melero. En Comunidad: Comunicacion y conexion. 1 Edition.
McGraw Hill, 2008.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Supplementary material: as appropriate

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

