BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPAN 100 - Beginning Conversational Spanish
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: NONE
Transfer Status: NT
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course emphasizes the development of basic understanding and speaking skills in Spanish.
Minimal emphasis is placed on formal grammar. Multimedia cultural presentations are offered
throughout the course. This course is intended for those who wish to develop "survival" Spanish in
everyday basic situations.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. demonstrate an understanding of spoken Spanish at the basic level
B. demonstrate the ability to speak Spanish at the basic level
C. compare and contrast elements of Hispanic culture
D. compare and contrast elements of Hispanic culture
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Spanish-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course.
Lecture
Topics
1. Pronunciation
2. Greetings
3. Days of the week, numbers, telling time
4. Nouns and articles
5. Numbers and gender agreement
6. Subject pronouns and verb conjugation
7. Present tense
8. Interrogatives
9. Vocabulary pertaining to daily activities and travel
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
3.00
5.00
6.00
6.00
6.00
9.00
3.00
9.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations

F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Group activities
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a diagram with statistics about recreational activities of Cuban youth and describe
the information to a partner.
2. Read a short text about the climates of different regions of Chile. Afterward, create a table
with the most important information, such as high temperatures and precipitation.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a brief diary entry about the day's events, in order to practice the past tense.
2. Write a short message to a friend describing the classes you are taking and your favorite
subject.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete several "cloze" activities focused on accurate conjugation of verbs located in
the textbook or handout and bring to the next class.
2. Prepare outside of class an original skit based on a communicative context found in course
materials. Perform the skit in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Hammitt and Wald. Learn Spanish the Fast and Fun Way. 3 Edition. Barrons, 2004.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

