BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPAN 16 - Hispanic Film
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3
Recommended Prep: Reading Level IV; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is a delineation and discussion of the central themes of selected films of prominent
Hispanic filmmakers. A wide selection of feature length Spanish language films will be viewed and
discussed. Hispanic cultures, as displayed in film, will be examined in terms of uniqueness and
universality. Emphasis will also be placed on the oral and written practice of Spanish. This course is
taught in Spanish and is intended for students who have completed three semesters of college level
Spanish or who are native speakers.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. describe the implications and importance of cultural factors in relation to the films viewed
B. discuss the diversity of Spanish-speaking cultures
C. describe the basic human dimensions that are the foundation of all cultures
D. demonstrate an expanded ability to manipulate grammatical structures in Spanish
E. comprehend and use an increased body of Spanish vocabulary
F. demonstrate critical thinking through effective writing in Spanish
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to Hispanic film
2. Hispanic filmmakers
3. Overview of historical, political, cultural realities of the 20th and 21st
centuries pertaining to the Spanish-speaking World
4. Memory and Oblivion
5. Immigration and Exile
6. Marginalized Identities
7. The Spanish-Speaking World and Globalization
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
5.00
3.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Films

V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Written or Oral Examinations
D. Written exercises based on films
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “Las madres de la plaza de mayo” on madres.org for contextual information about
La historia oficial.
2. Review the instructor generated handout on Miel para Oshún. Be prepared to discuss the
significance of the Cuban Revolution and its aftermath.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze the socio-political context of Hispanic films, critically evaluating culturally
relevant themes.
2. Write an essay on the portrayal of the period of the Mexican Revolution in the film Como
agua para chocolate.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Choose a feature length film from Latin America or Spain and prepare a group
presentation following the model given by instructor.
2. Research a current topic Hispanic film production.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. McVey Gill, Smalley, Haro. Cinema for Spanish Conversation. 3rd Edition. Focus Publishing,
2010.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

