BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPAN 14 - Hispanic Short Stories
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course is an introduction to Hispanic literature through the short story genre. Students will read,
discuss and analyze short stories by Latin American and Spanish authors. Emphasis will also be placed
on the oral and written practice of Spanish. This course is taught in Spanish and is intended for
students who have completed three semesters of college level Spanish or who are native speakers.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. comprehend the content of selected short stories in Spanish at the intermediate level
B. demonstrate an expanded ability to manipulate grammatical structures in Spanish
C. comprehend and use an increased body of Spanish vocabulary
D. analyze the elements of character, setting, plot, point of view and theme
E. describe the implications and importance of cultural factors in relation to the work studied
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction to the short story
2. The function of the major elements of the short story: character, plot,
setting, and point of view
3. Historical, political, and cultural realities as they determine theme and
meaning
4. Reading and analysis of short stories from various Spanish-speaking
countries
Total Hours

Hours
3.00
3.00
3.00
42.00
51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Guest Speakers
C. Collaborative Group Work
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Reading Assignments
G. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation

C. Homework
D. Group Participation
E. Class participation
F. Written Assignments
G. Written or Oral Examinations
H. Short papers
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read “El recado” by Elena Poniatowsca, and be prepared to discuss its historical and
cultural context.
2. Read “El huésped” Amparo Dávila and be prepared to discuss personal experiences and
opinions relevant to the story.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Analyze the socio-political context of Hispanic short stories, critically evaluating
culturally relevant themes.
2. Write an essay on the topic of revenge in the Colombian culture, as depicted in “Un día de
éstos” by Gabriel García Marquez.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Research the Hispanic author Julio Cortázar and explain what aspects of his life are
prevalent in his works.
2. Work in a group to collaborate and develop a short story in Spanish with thematic
significance relating to the studied literary works in the class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Kooreman, T. E. and Kooreman, O.M., Sanchez de la calle, E.. Breves cuentos hispanos. 4
Edition. Prentice Hall, 2009.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Spanish dictionary

Created/Revised by: Judith Rojas
Date: 11/07/2011

