BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPAN 3 - Third Semester Spanish
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the first half of intermediate Spanish which further develops the skills of understanding,
speaking, reading, and writing within a culturally rich context. It is a review and further study of
structural elements. Reading selections from the Hispanic world will be included. Students who have
completed at least two, but fewer than three years of high school Spanish (or equivalent) with a letter
grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present date, should register for Fourth Semester Spanish.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. comprehend the Spanish language more successfully in the following contexts as it is used by
native speakers: business Settings, quotidian community life, familiar settings (e.g., with family
and friends)
B. speak Spanish with increased proficiency and accuracy
C. speak Spanish with improved rhythm, intonation, and stress patterns
D. demonstrate correct and idiomatic speaking habits
E. demonstrate improved reading skills in Spanish with direct comprehension, i.e., without
conscious translation
F. demonstrate Spanish writing skills
G. compare and contrast elements of the cultures of Spanish-speaking regions
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Spanish-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Introductions and review
2. Present subjunctive - volition, emotion
3. Present subjunctive - doubt, denial, uncertainty
4. Present subjunctive - impersonal expressions
5. Stressed possessive
6. Review of reflexive and reciprocal verbs
7. The future tense
8. Present subjunctive in adjectival clauses with indefinte antecedents.
9. Present subjunctive - conjunctions of contingency and purpose
10. Review of present subjunctive
11. Introduction to present perfect subjunctive

Hours
2.00
6.50
6.50
4.00
4.00
5.00
6.50
6.50
3.00
3.00
4.00

12. Introduction to imperfect subjunctive
13. The conditional
14. "If" clauses
Total Hours

4.00
6.50
6.50
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Spanish except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Portfolios
C. Oral Presentation
D. Homework
E. Journal
F. Class participation
G. Exams
H. Collaborative Group Work
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read and be prepared to discuss the characters and main themes of the novel Marianela
by Benito Galdós.
2. Read and be prepared to discuss the characters and main themes of a short story by Isabel
Allende selected by the instructor.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write an essay on the historical significance of the Inca civilization in the modern
Peruvian society.
2. Write 3-5 pages, developing the topic of a sustainable future in Latin America
(expounding the topics discussed in Chapter 13).
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Interview an immigrant from a Spanish-speaking country and organize an in-class
presentation.
2. Research a current political/social topic as presented by the Univision channel or website.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Amores, Maria. SPAN 01: Experience Spanish w/ConnectPlus PPH.. 1st Edition. Mcgraw Hill,
2011.
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Connect Spanish Online

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

