BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPAN 2 - Second Semester Spanish
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level III
Transfer Status: CSU/UC
68 hours Lecture

4 Unit(s)

This course is the second half of beginning Spanish, which further develops the skills of
understanding, speaking, reading, and writing Spanish. It continues to introduce students to various
aspects of Hispanic culture. Students who have completed at least two, but fewer than three years of
high school Spanish (or equivalent) with a letter grade of "A" or "B" within one year of the present
date, should register for Third Semester Spanish.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. improve the clarity of pronunciation in Spanish
B. comprehend basic Spanish
C. use both written and oral Spanish for communication in everyday situations
D. formulate arguments supporting the importance of second language acquisition
E. appraise elements of Hispanic cultures
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Critical discussion of culture in Spanish-speaking communities shall be infused throughout the
course: Family and Daily Life, Politics, Education, Healthcare System, Arts, Economy, and
History.
Lecture
Topics
1. Indirect Object Pronouns
2. Double Object Pronouns
3. Formal Commands
4. Preterite of regular verbs
5. Preterite of Irregular Verbs and Stem-changing verbs
6. Impersonal and Passive se; se for unplanned occurrences
7. Informal Commands
8. Adverbs
9. The Imperfect Tense
10. Reciprocal Verbs
11. Preterite vs. Imperfect
12. Present Perfect Tense
13. Hace + "time" + que + signs
14. Introduction to the Subjunctive Mood
Total Hours

Hours
4.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
68.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Collaborative Group Work
C. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each
hour of lecture
D. Discussion
E. Reading Assignments
F. Multimedia Presentations
G. The class will be conducted in Spanish except when English is needed to explain structural
elements and to give other important explanations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Quizzes
B. Oral Presentation
C. Class participation
D. Exams
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a diagram with statistics about recreational activities of Argentinian youth and
describe the information to a partner.
2. Read a short text about the climates of different regions of Chile. Afterward, create a table
with the most important information, such as high temperatures and precipitation.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Write a brief diary entry about the day's events, in order to practice the past tense.
2. Write a short message to a friend describing the classes you are taking and your favorite
subject.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Complete several "cloze" activities focused on accurate conjugation of verbs located in
the textbook or handout and bring to the next class.
2. Prepare outside of class an original skit based on a communicative context found in course
materials. Perform the skit in class.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Amores, Maria. SPAN 01: Experience Spanish w/ConnectPlus PPH. 1st Edition. McGraw-Hill,
2011.

Created/Revised by: Ileana Gantt
Date: 11/07/2011

