BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPE 322 - Group Social Growth for Persons with Substantial Disabilities
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Special Education K-12
Transfer Status: NT
280 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course provides group socialization training for persons with substantial disabilities through
group interaction and activities. Group Social Growth focuses on team building skills, interacting in
group settings, and promoting companionship. Topics include group socialization, timelines/financial
obligations, self-advocacy in groups, safety, and community resource assistance. An individual
assessment of needs as well as an ongoing Individual Service Plan (ISP) is a component of this course.
The ISP will dictate the number of hours each student will spend in this course. Unlimited repeats.
Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate appropriate social, physical, and emotional behaviors in a group setting.
B. Practice tolerance toward other people.
C. Recognize and promote companionship among a social group.
D. Demonstrate creative and constructive use of time.
E. Utilize team building skills.
F. Employ responsibility in the use of money management.
G. Increase community safety awareness.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Group socialization
2. Compliance to pre-established group timelines
3. Group financial obligations
4. Self-advocacy in group environment
5. Community resource assistance
Total Hours

Hours
56.00
56.00
56.00
56.00
56.00
280.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Individual and Group Instruction
B. Instructor Demonstration and Coaching
C. Supervised Group Activities
D. Community Integration
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Practical Evaluations
B. Individual Service Plans developed to assess placement of student into program and establish

B. Individual Service Plans developed to assess placement of student into program and establish
desired outcomes and individual developmental objectives covering social and physical needs
C. Individual Progress Conferences utilizing frequency charts to evaluate the student's progress
toward established objectives
D. Participation/practical application is utilized throughout the day in all settings to enhance
learning opportunities
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Personalized calendar and time keeping devices
B. Money: currency, coins, checkbook
C. Public transportation schedules
D. Newspaper/Internet

Created/Revised by: Susan Mendez
Date: 11/30/2009

