BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPE 320 - Independent Living Skills for Persons with Substantial Disabilities
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Special Education K-12
Transfer Status: NT
280 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course provides independent living training for persons with substantial disabilities. Independent
Living Skills focuses on establishing/maintaining a positive lifestyle, opportunity to progress to the
highest level of independent functioning, and hands on training in each student’s living environment.
Topics include health and safety, personal hygiene, cooking/nutrition, exercise, money and time
management, medical awareness, problem solving, communication skills, and emergency
preparedness. An individual assessment of needs as well as an ongoing Individual Service Plan (ISP)
is a component of this course. The ISP will dictate the number of hours each student will spend in this
course. Unlimited repeats. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Apply the skills necessary to live independently.
B. Demonstrate independence in a confident manner.
C. Practice responsibility and recognize available circles of support.
D. Practice good nutrition and exercise habits.
E. Practice good grooming, hygiene and clothing choice.
F. Recognize and foster appropriate sexual awareness and utilize available educational
opportunities.
G. Employ an understanding of the value of money management and budgeting.
H. Demonstrate time awareness and management.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1.
Health and safety
2.
Personal hygiene
3.
Cooking and nutrition
4.
Money management
5.
Time management
6.
Medical/medication awareness
7.
Problem solving
8.
Communication skill development
9.
Emergency preparedness
Total Hours

Hours
32.00
31.00
31.00
31.00
31.00
31.00
31.00
31.00
31.00
280.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Demonstrations
B. Individual Instruction
C. Hands on training/guidance in personal residence or community setting
D. Educational outings within community (bank, grocery store, pharmacy)
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Practical Evaluations
B. Individual Service Plans developed to assess placement of student into program and establish
desired outcomes and individual developmental objectives covering social and physical needs
C. Individual Progress Conferences utilizing frequency charts to evaluate the student's progress
toward established objectives
D. Participation/practical application is utilized throughout the day in all settings to enhance
learning opportunities
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Kitchen appliances and utensils/household appliances
B. Newspaper
C. Computer
D. Bookkeeping materials
E. Medication dispensers

Created/Revised by: Susan Mendez
Date: 11/30/2009

