BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPE 316 - Health and Wellness for Persons with Substantial Disabilities
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Special Education K-12
Transfer Status: NT
200 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course is designed for persons with substantial disabilities attending a facility in the community
generally known as a day activity center. Health and Wellness focuses on interpersonal skills
development through physical and behavioral techniques. Topics include problem solving, breathing
and relaxation techniques, attention and focus, sensory awareness, utilization of all five senses, social
and personal adjustment, self-advocacy for fostering independence, fine and gross motor skills, and
personal care and hygiene. An individual assessment of motor communication and self-help learning
needs as well as an ongoing Individual Service Plan (ISP) is a component of this course. The ISP will
dictate the number of hours each student will spend in this course. Unlimited repeats.
Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate problem solving skills in performing manual tasks during learning activities.
B. Demonstrate breathing and relaxation techniques when faced with behavioral challenges.
C. Utilize all five senses (touch, taste, hearing, smell and sight) to safely integrate within the
center-based classes and in the community.
D. Demonstrate focus and attention to task for increasingly longer periods of time.
E. Demonstrate self-advocacy skills by actively participating in role play activities, monthly
client/staff meetings, and the Work Training Center (WTC) Client Council.
F. Demonstrate physical stamina and improved strength in performing manual tasks.
G. Demonstrate tolerance of others in peer and community interactions.
H. Demonstrate increased ability to manipulate small objects.
I. Demonstrate proper personal care and basic hygiene practices.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1.
Practice with relaxation techniques
2.
Creating and maintaining a calm environment
3.
Task attention and focus
4.
Tolerance activities to foster work readiness
5.
Sensory awareness - Tactile stimulation
6.
Sensory awareness - Taste sensations
7.
Sensory awareness - Auditory awareness
8.
Sensory awareness - Olfactory awareness
9.
Sensory awareness - Visual awareness
10. Role play activities that foster independence

Hours
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00

11. Social and personal adjustment skills
12. Self-advocacy and the impact on independent living
13. Learning to speak freely
14. Steps to increase stamina, strength and endurance
15. Stamina, strength and endurance training
16. Fine and gross motor manipulation
17. Discovering exercise opportunities
18. Maintenance of health/prevention of illness
19. Personal care and hygiene
20. Housekeeping responsibilities
Total Hours

10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
200.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Applied Classroom Activities
C. Applied Community Activities
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration and application of individual skills repeated throughout the day to enhance
learning opportunities.
B. Individual Service Plans (ISP) developed to assess placement of student into program and
establish desired outcomes and individual developmental objectives.
C. Individual Progress Conferences utilizing frequency charts to evaluate the student's progress
toward established objectives.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read an article about preventing illnesses and share what you learned with the class.
2. Read a magazine article about different exercise techniques and list the benefits to share
with the class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Develop a half page exercise schedule to submit to the instructor.
2. Research and compile a list of health tips for healthy living to discuss with a classmate.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Snoezelen Equipment
B. Assorted Tactile, Visual, Olfactory, Visual and Auditory Devices and Equipment which require
task attention and focus
C. Exercise Mats, Balls, Weights, etc.
D. Puzzles, Board Games, and other Fine Motor Manipulatives
E. Vidoes, CD's and DVD's related to Social Skills and Self-Advocacy

Created/Revised by: Julie Nuzum
Date: 04/27/2015

