BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPE 310 - Integration into the Community for Persons with Substantial
Disabilities
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Special Education K-12
Transfer Status: NT
200 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course is designed for persons with substantial disabilities attending a facility in the community
generally known as a day activity center. Integration into the Community will focus on learning how
to become a part of the community and will include social skills, communication skills, problem
solving skills, personal safety skills and increasing stamina and endurance for walking or wheeling self
safely while navigating uneven terrain in the community. An individual assessment of needs as well
as an ongoing Individual Service Plan (ISP) is a component of this program. The ISP will dictate the
number of hours each student will spend in this course. Unlimited repeats. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory
Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Correctly identify and safely demonstrate the ability to walk across a crosswalk with the
“walk/don’t walk" signals, as well as green and red lights.
B. Demonstrate the ability to remain in close proximity to the instructor and class when in the
community.
C. Identify environments where a "quiet voice" is appropriate such as banks, shops and museums
and use a "quiet voice" when in these environments.
D. Communicate basic needs and request information from a variety of community personnel such
as shop clerks, bank tellers, and museum docents.
E. Independently complete a purchase and transaction at a grocery store, the bank and a recreation
venue.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1.
Stranger identification/personal safety
2.
Recognizing dangerous situations
3.
Street safety awareness
4.
Reading street signals/signs
5.
Transportation and using judgement
6.
Personal shopping vs. shopping for someone else
7.
Personal banking
8.
Recreation and leisure activities access
9.
Nutrition and decision-making
10. Product quality comparisons/economic
11. Price comparisons

Hours
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00

12. Personal finance/budget for social occasions
13. Alternative income possibilities
14. Choosing recreation and leisure activities
15. Recreation access considerations/rights
16. Mental health and healthy lifestyle
17. Increasing walking and wheel chair stamina
18. Communicating basic needs
19. Appropriate use of "quiet voice"
20. Social aspects and communication
21. Intonations and connotations
Total Hours

10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
5.00
5.00
10.00
10.00
200.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Instructor Demonstrations
B. Applied classroom activities
C. Supervision and observation of student integration in social and community activities.
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Demonstration and application of individual skills repeated throughout the day to enhance
learning opportunities.
B. Individual Service Plans (ISP) developed to assess placement of student into program and
establish desired outcomes and individual developmental objectives.
C. Individual Progress Conferences utilizing frequency charts to evaluate the student's progress
toward established objectives.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read a healthy lifestyle nutritional and exercise tip from a magazine and share what you
learned with the class.
2. Read a local newspaper article on an unsafe situation and discuss alternatives to the
situation in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Track your nutritional intake, daily walking, and exercise on an instructor-designed log for
progression toward a healthier lifestyle. Turn in your log to the instructor.
2. Complete mock deposit slips, checks, and withdrawal slips. They will be checked by a
peer for accuracy.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Not applicable.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Money
B. Calculators
C. Newspapers
D. Shopping Lists
E. Bus Schedules

Created/Revised by: Julie Nuzum
Date: 04/27/2015

