BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPE 321 - Individual Social Growth Skills for Persons with Substantial
Disabilities
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Special Education K-12
Transfer Status: NT
280 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course provides individual assessment and one-on-one socialization training necessary for
independent living and integration into the community for students with substantial disabilities.
Personal and household management topics include time and money management, sexual awareness,
community resource assistance, personal hygiene, and physical wellness. An individual assessment of
needs as well as an ongoing Individual Service Plan (ISP) is a component of this course. The ISP will
dictate the number of hours each student will spend in this course. Unlimited repeats.
Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Demonstrate the self guidance skills necessary to participate in community based programs.
B. Develop communication methods demonstrating tolerance toward others.
C. Recognize and use time management.
D. Employ responsibility in the use of money management.
E. Recognize and use appropriate sexual\social behaviors.
F. Practice integration into the community and utilize available circles of support.
G. Practice good grooming, hygiene and clothing choice.
H. Practice good nutrition and exercise habits.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lab
Topics
1. Individual Community Socialization/Integration
2. Time Management
3. Money Management
4. Sexual Awareness and Education
5. Community Resource Assistance
6. Appropriate Hygiene and Grooming
7. Physical Wellness
Total Hours

Hours
40.00
40.00
40.00
40.00
40.00
40.00
40.00
280.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Individual Instruction
B. Instructor Demonstration and Coaching
C. Individualized Activities
D. Community Ingegration
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Practical Evaluations
B. Individual Service Plans developed to assess placement of student into program and establish
desired outcomes and individual developmental objectives covering social and physical needs.
C. Individual Progress Conferences utilizing frequency charts to evaluate the student's progress
toward established objectives.
D. Participation with practical application is utilized throughout the day in all settings to enhance
learning opportunities.
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Money: currency and coins
B. Public transportation schedules
C. Community facilities
D. Personalized calendars and clocks

Created/Revised by: Susan Mendez
Date: 05/03/2010

