BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
SPE 306 - Work Activity for Adults with Disabilities
Prerequisite(s): NONE
Recommended Prep: Special Education K-12
Transfer Status: NT
510 hours Lab

0 Unit(s)

This course provides individual assessment and vocational, functional, and social skills training for
students with developmental disabilities through work readiness opportunities in a sheltered workshop
environment. Areas of vocational activity can include: product assembly, sewing, wood product
production, recycling, and landscape services. This is a non-credit course designed to support the
educational program for persons with substantial disabilities. Unlimited repeats.
Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory Only. Open Entry/Open Exit.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Identify both personal and vocational needs to develop an individual plan.
B. Demonstrate heightened level of responsibility.
C. Demonstrate heightened level of self advocacy.
D. Practice safety in all situations and activities.
E. Recognize impact of making sound decisions.
F. Demonstrate knowledge and skills in the use of hand tools and power tools, if applicable.
G. Demonstrate heightened level of sociability.
H. Demonstrate heightened level of knowledge in technical skills.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. General Goals
1. To provide individuals with life -skill proficiencies that are essential to the fulfillment of
vocational and personal goals.
B. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule

Lab
Topics
1. Students will have the opportunity to consult with the lab instructor on any
of the following topics (designated by their individual IEP).
2. Product assembly
3. Sewing
4. Wood product production
5. Recycling
6. Landscape
Total Hours

Hours
0
102.00
102.00
102.00
102.00
102.00
510.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Demonstrations
B. Group instruction
C. Hands on training/guidance in sheltered workshop environments
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Examinations - Hands on evaluation or work activities
B. Technical Proficiency Examinations - Evaluation of correct and safe use of tools and machines
C. Individual Program Plans - Plan developed to assess placement of student into program and
establish desired outcomes and individual developmental objectives covering social and
vocational needs
D. Individual Progress Conferences Utilizing Frequency Charts - Conferences to evaluate students
progress considering established objectives
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
B. Writing Assignments
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Materials Other Than Textbooks:
A. Safety handbooks and audio visual aids for specific machines
B. Specific materials, tools and equipment to support given projects i.e; landscape materials, wood,
cloth.
C. Practical uses of assistive technical devices

Created/Revised by: Thomas Johnson
Date: 04/30/2007

