BUTTE COLLEGE
COURSE OUTLINE
I. CATALOG DESCRIPTION
WLD 56 - Welding Industry Employment Preparation
Prerequisite(s): WLD 22, WLD 24, WLD 25, WLD 26, WLD 40, WLD 50, WLD
154 and NCCER Level II Welding Qualification
Co-requisite(s): WLD 28, WLD 30, WLD 32, WLD 34, WLD 36, WLD 42, WLD
156
Recommended Prep: Reading Level III; English Level II; Math Level II
Transfer Status: CSU
51 hours Lecture

3 Unit(s)

This course teaches job seeking skills demanded of welders in the industry today. Topics include a
comparison of prospective employers within the welding industry, preparation for taking employment
required skills tests, portfolio development, job-specific interview techniques and work place ethics
and professionalism.
II. OBJECTIVES
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A. Construct a professional welding career portfolio.
B. Compare prospective employers within the welding industry.
C. Demonstrate communication and presentation skills for job seeking, interviewing and
negotiating.
D. Complete mock job interviews with local welding industry professionals.
E. Complete sample preemployment written tests specific for a career in welding.
III. COURSE CONTENT
A. Unit Titles/Suggested Time Schedule
Lecture
Topics
1. Introduction and safety related to verbal communication in a technical
interview process
2. Careers within the welding industry
a. Compare employment options
1. Types of welding
2. Welders skill level
3. Labor market trends
4. Employers within the industry
3. Conducting a job search
a. Internet search
1. On-campus career center
b. Networking
1. American Welding Society (AWS) meeting
2. Industry tours
c. Other job search resources
4. Employment considerations and requirements

Hours
1.00
4.00

4.00

4.00

4. Employment considerations and requirements
a. Drug-testing
b. Background check
c. Ethics and professionalism on the job
5. Preparing for pre-employment testing
a. Written tests
1. Procedure qualification records (PQR's)
2. Welding procedure sheets (WPS's)
3. Welding procedure qualification test records (WPQTR's)
4. Shop drawings
5. Welding symbols
6. Welding calculations
7. Layout and design of welding projects
b. Skills tests
1. Following PQR's
2. Following WPS's
3. Following WPQTR's
4. Shop drawings
5. Welding symbols
6. Welding calculations
7. Layout and design of welding projects
8. Welding positions
9. Welding processes
10. Code weld tests
11. Type of non-destructive testing (NDT) or destructive testing (DT)
methods used
6. Creating a portfolio
a. Resume and cover letter
b. Letters of reference
c. Obtaining and using transcripts
d. Certificates, diplomas, awards, and AWS and American Society of
Mechanical Engineers (ASME) welding certifications
e. Welding projects/welding skill photos
1. PQR's
2. WPS's
3. WPQTR's
4. Shop drawings
5. Welding symbols
f. Additional welding samples of professional competences
7. The job interview
a. Preparation for the interview: attire, behavior, and ethics
b. Mock interview
c. Post interview follow-up
Total Hours

4.00

16.00

10.00

12.00

51.00

IV. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
A. Lecture
B. Instructor Demonstrations
C. Guest Speakers
D. Homework: Students are required to complete two hours of outside-of-class homework for each

hour of lecture
E. Discussion
F. Multimedia Presentations
V. METHODS OF EVALUATION
A. Exams/Tests
B. Quizzes
C. Portfolios
D. Mid-term and final examinations
E. Homework assignments
F. Mock interview
VI. EXAMPLES OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Reading Assignments
1. Read assigned Wall Street Journal article and be prepared to discuss in class.
2. Read module 2 and be prepared to discuss in class.
B. Writing Assignments
1. Prepare a resume and cover letter for employment within the welding industry.
2. Write an essay explaining how the assigned Wall Street Journal article can be
implemented into a resume and how it relates to the class.
C. Out-of-Class Assignments
1. Create a job portfolio for use during an interview.
2. Create a job portfolio.
VII. RECOMMENDED MATERIALS OF INSTRUCTION
Textbooks:
A. Reardon, Lenz, Sampson, Peterson. Career Development & Planning: A Comprehensive
Approach.. 2nd Edition. Delmar, 2000.
B. AWS Committee on Methods of Inspection. Welding Inspection. 3rd Edition. AWS, 2000.
C. McCabe and McCabe. Writing Effective Resumes: A Complete Guide. South-Western
Publishing Co., 1993.
D. National Center for Construction Education and Research (NCCER). Welding Level Three. 4th
Edition. Pearson Education INC, 2010.
E. National Center for Construction Education and Research (NCCER). Welding Level Two. 4th
Edition. Pearson Education INC, 2010.

Created/Revised by: Donald Robinson
Date: 04/18/2011

